

===== PAGE 1 =====
RNG: Flat Datacenter Networks at Scale
Giacomo Bernardi Ratul Mahajan † C. Seshadhri‡
Enrico Carlesso Chinchu Merine Joseph Saurabh Kumar Pavan Manikonda
Luiza Popa Randy Ram Steven Robinson Elizabeth Tennent
Amazon Web Services
ABSTRACT
We design and deploy in production the first flat datacenter
networks. Our design, calledRNG, is based on quasi-random
graphs. While the cost and fault-tolerance benefits of such
topologies have been long known, their practical realization
has been hampered by a lack of scalable routing and cabling
approaches.RNGhas a new distributed routing protocol
that exploits the properties of random graphs to find a large
number of edge disjoint paths between pairs of endpoints.
It uses a novel passive optical device that internally shuffles
cables, which makes its cabling complexity similar to that
of fat trees. We show thatRNGmatches or exceeds the per-
formance of fat trees for a range of traffic patterns, despite
being up to 45% cheaper.RNGis now the default datacenter
network for most workloads at Amazon.
1 INTRODUCTION
The simplicity of fat tree topologies has made them the
workhorse of datacenter networks. But they offer a stark
trade-off between cost and performance. Operators either
build non-blocking fabrics in which any endpoint can trans-
mit/receive at its full capacity; or they build oversubscribed
fabrics that congest when a small, unfavorable set of end-
points transmit/receive at a high rate. Non-blocking fabrics
are prohibitively expensive at scale, so organizations tend
to build oversubscribed fabrics and risk congestion even for
performance-sensitive workloads [16, 40, 43].
The root problem is that fat trees lackcapacity fungibility.
The strict hierarchical structure means traffic between pairs
of endpoints is limited to small subsets of links in the topol-
ogy. These links can congest while most others lie idle. The
lack of capacity fungibility increases the cost of providing a
consistent, congestion-free experience. One must provision
ample capacity everywhere even if a small subset of endpoint
pairs need high capacity at any given time.
Researchers have proposed reconfigurable topologies for
this problem [11, 17, 21, 22, 30–32, 51, 60]. These designs use
†Also affiliated with the University of Washington
‡Also affiliated with the University of California, Santa Cruz
hardware such as optical switches, steerable wireless anten-
nas, and free-space optical devices to dynamically change ca-
pacity between endpoints. Such hardware is not (yet) proven
at scale. Most designs also use a centralized control plane
to infer fabric-wide demand and configure the hardware.
Such control planes are difficult to realize at scale for bursty,
latency-sensitive workloads such as Web services.
A promising alternative that provides capacity fungibility
is a flat topology with commodity routers connected as an
expander graph [25, 26, 37, 45, 49]. In addition to their lower
cost, such topologies are fault tolerant because the blast
radius of any failure is small, unlike upper-layer failures in
fat trees. These benefits of expander network topologies have
been known for over a decade [45], but these topologies are
not a reality because of three unsolved challenges [33, 43].
1. Routing. Shortest-path routing, commonly used for fat
trees, is a poor fit for expanders because it cannot exploit the
diversity of paths that exist. Some pairs of nodes have only
one shortest path between them, so shortest path routing
can cause congestion. Prior works recommend 𝑘-shortest
paths routing which spreads traffic between the source and
destination across𝑘 shortest paths [45, 49]. But𝑘-shortest
paths routing cannot be realized for large networks using
commodity switches. It needs an order of magnitude more
(fast, expensive) memory than what is available today (§3).
2. Cabling. Expanders connect pairs of devices that can be
far away in the physical space. Such cabling is complex and
expensive [33]. Worse, when more racks land, the process of
incrementally adding new routers requires breaking existing
connections. If routers have 𝑑 links to other routers, each
time a router lands, we need to break 𝑑/2existing links
whose endpoints are physically spread over the datacenter.
This type of work risks collateral damage and slows down
rack installs, a key concern for datacenter operators.
3. Performance predictability. Prior work on benchmark-
ing expanders focus on concrete topologies with fixed pa-
rameters. It is unclear how a fabric might perform for other
parameters, which makes it difficult for operators to de-
sign topologies that meet specific performance targets. They
would need to search the combinatorial parameter space
using simulations, which is infeasible for large networks.
1
arXiv:2604.15261v3  [cs.NI]  21 May 2026


===== PAGE 2 =====
In contrast, fat tree designs can be automatically generated
based on performance targets [2, 36, 41].
We solve these challenges and deploy (to our knowledge)
the first production datacenter fabrics based on expanders.
Our design, calledRNG, connects routers using a mix of ran-
domized and deterministic cabling segments. This construc-
tion yields quasi-random graphs that mimic the statistical
properties of truly random graphs [8]. Our routing algorithm
calledSpraypointis purpose-built for random graphs and
permits a fully distributed implementation on commodity
hardware. It finds a large number—close to the node degree—
of edge disjoint paths between endpoint pairs and these paths
minimally overlap across different pairs. These properties
lead to capacity fungibility and high throughput.
We develop a cabling approach based on a new passive
optical device called aShuffleBoxthat mixes connections
between routers internally. We place shuffle ShuffleBoxes at
a small number of planned locations in the datacenter. This
allows the number of physically-connected location pairs, a
key driver of cabling complexity, to match that of fat trees.
The concentration properties of random graphs and the
decorrelation of Spraypoint routing enable accurate mod-
eling ofRNGfabric performance as a function of topology
parameters (e.g., graph size, node degree, etc.). We develop
models for path length, number of edge disjoint paths, and
oversubscription. The models make the impact of various
parameters and design trade-offs (e.g., path length versus
oversubscription) transparent. Operators can use them to
design topologies that meet their performance targets.
We deploy twoRNG-based production fabrics. Transport
and application layer benchmarks confirm thatRNG’s per-
formance is on par with fat trees, unimpacted by the pecu-
liarities of expanders such as variable path lengths between
endpoint pairs. Such end-to-end validation is a first for ex-
pander topologies.
Our analysis reveals thatRNGtopologies are 9–45% cheaper
than fat trees with equivalent oversubscription ratio. The
extent of cost reduction depends on the oversubscription
ratio and is independent of network size and the number of
switch ports. We also find that, for the same oversubscription
ratio,RNGoffers higher throughput than fat trees across a
range of traffic patterns.
2 THE POTENTIAL OF FLAT EXPANDERS
The salient property of expander graphs is edge expansion [53].
For every minority subset𝑆 of nodes, the set of edges that
lead out of𝑆, called the cut, is large. Edge expansion provides
capacity fungibility because every𝑆 has large bandwidth to-
ward other nodes. In contrast, in hierarchical topologies such
as fat trees, the cut of a subtree only leads to parents, so the
expansion is poor. We illustrate with an example.
T3T1T2T6T4T5T9T7T8T12T10T11
(a)
T3T1T2T6T4T5T9T7T8T12T10T11 (b)
Figure 1: Example fat tree (a) and expander topologies
(b). Each switch has four ports. Two ports of each ToR
(T1–T12) connect to servers (not shown).
Figure 1a shows a generalized fat tree [38]. T1–T12 are ToR
(top-of-rack) switches, connected via aggregation (middle)
and spine (top) layers. The oversubscription ratio of this
network is 3:1 since the capacity of the ToR-aggregation
layer is thrice that of the aggregation-spine layer. The cut for
subset of nodes with T1–T3 and their two parents is two links
connecting to the spines. These nodes cannot send more than
two units of traffic to T4-T12 even though most other links
in the fabric are unused. Thus, capacity is stranded.
While skewed traffic patterns with a few heavy transmit-
ters have received the most attention [25, 26], fat trees can
strand capacity with uniform traffic as well. Consider an all-
to-all pattern where each ToR wants to send the same data to
each other ToR. The transmission rate between pairs of ToRs
will be 8
12×9 of link capacity. This calculation follows from
the12× 9flows crossing the8aggregation-spine links. Given
two units of per-ToR capacity, this traffic pattern strands
roughly 60% (2−11 8
12×9 ) of the ToR uplink capacity.
Expanders, such as the random graph between T1–T12 in
Figure 1b, can do significantly better. If T1–T3 are the only
senders, they will be limited largely by their local capacity
when other nodes are silent. Because of the expansion prop-
erty, there is no small cut that constrains traffic. Even for the
all-to-all traffic pattern, given a capable routing algorithm,
we can effectively use all links in the topology.
Capacity fungibility lowers cost because the deployed ca-
pacity is more efficiently used, allowing smaller deployments.
A simplistic view of the lower cost of flat expanders is that
all upper-layer routers are removed. But an expander that
is performance-equivalent to a fat tree may need more ToR
uplinks (fabric-facing ports) because some uplink capacity is
consumed by traffic relayed for other ToRs. It may thus need
more ToRs to support the same number of servers, given a
fixed number of ports per ToR. Despite this effect, expanders
can reduce cost by up to 45% (§9.4).
Expander topologies are also more fault-tolerant. Edge
expansion makes it difficult to partition the network, and flat
2


===== PAGE 3 =====
structure lowers the impact of failures. In a fat tree, upper-
layer router failures have a large impact because they carry
traffic for many endpoint pairs. Even a single spine router
failure in Figure 1a halves the available capacity for most
ToR pairs. In Figure 1b, there are no such special routers.
We focus on multi-tenant datacenters with heterogeneous
workloads. In the future, we will investigate using expanders
for specialized workloads such as large-scale AI training.
These workloads may demand specific topologies such as
Rail-optimized fat trees and may want local capacity islands
such as those at the aggregation layer in Figure 1a [27, 59].
Flat, random topologies do not have aggregation islands.1
3 REQUIREMENTS AND CHALLENGES
Expander topologies are theoretically promising. But to be
practical at scale at Amazon and supplant fat trees, they must
meet several requirements. Prior expander-based designs [4,
45, 49] do not meet these requirements.
Realizable using commodity switches. The network should
be realizable using commodity switches and forwarding
ASICs which have limited memory. While custom hardware
can be developed, it increases cost and poses substantial
technical and supply-chain risks.
Prior designs cannot be realized for large networks using
commodity switches. To counter the limitations of shortest
paths in expander graphs, they usually propose𝑘-shortest
paths routing. Its typical implementation requires tunnels
(e.g., MPLS, VLAN [35]) or forwarding based on source (in
addition to destination) addresses. Suppose we want to build
a network with 𝑛=10K routers and use the recommended
value of 𝑘=8 [45, 49]. If each path traverses4routers, we
need 320K forwarding entries per router on average (4𝑘𝑛2
entries spread across𝑛 routers). Current switches support
only 4-16K such entries,2 which is 20–80x lower. State reduc-
tion techniques [47, 48] cannot bridge this gap and adding
so much memory is prohibitively expensive. Harsh et al.
cleverly use VRFs (virtual routing and forwarding) to create
non-shortest paths, but this proposal too does not scale given
limits on the number of VRFs in commodity switches [23].
Deployment and operational simplicity. Deployment
and operational simplicity are critical for network reliability.
Simplicity is multi-faceted; we focus on control plane and
physical operations to deploy and incrementally expand the
network. For the control plane, we prefer demand-oblivious,
1RNGdoes have rack-level islands like fat trees. The lack of aggregation
islands is not a problem for general workloads in multi-tenant datacenters.
Coordinated application deployment across topologically related racks is
hard to realize here; tenants come and go continuously, with each needing
different server counts and types. That is why hyperscalers aim for fabric-
wide, uniform capacity pools [18].
2This table is different from the much larger table for destination-based
lookup which uses longest-prefix matching.
fully distributed routing (like today). For deployment and
expansion, we want the number of cabling steps to be small
and fast to minimize risk and expand faster.
Physical cabling is challenging for expanders because they
need to connect pairs of devices uncorrelated to physical
space. Jellyfish, which is based on truly random graphs, pro-
poses to simplify cabling by removing routers (ToRs) from
server racks and placing them centrally [ 45], but this ap-
proach increases latency between servers that share a rack,
an important consideration for some applications. It also in-
creases cabling cost because cheap, copper-based intra-rack
connectivity would need to be replaced with expensive, opti-
cal connectivity. All current approaches also require chang-
ing many existing connections each time a new rack lands,
a frequent operation in datacenters.
Predictable performance. Amazon operators deploy net-
work fabrics to meet specific capacity (number of servers)
and performance (e.g., oversubscription) targets. For expanders
to be acceptable, they must be able to easily and confidently
create topologies that meet their targets. Prior work bench-
marks topologies with specific parameters and does not show
how to create topologies for specific performance targets.
RNGmeets these three requirements via: (1) A new rout-
ing algorithm calledSpraypointthat finds a large number
of edge-disjoint paths. Like OSPF and BGP, it is demand-
oblivious and permits a fully-distributed operation on com-
modity hardware. (2) A cabling approach based on a passive
optical device called aShuffleBoxes. It limits the number of
endpoints that are physically cabled/re-cabled when the data-
center expands. (3) High-fidelity models for key performance
measures such as throughput and path length. We describe
these elements in more detail below.
4RNGOVERVIEW
RNGis based on a flat graph where routers interconnect
through a mix of deterministic and randomized choices.
Given their controlled randomness, our graphs are not truly
random; they are quasi-random graphs that behave like truly
random graphs and are optimal expanders [8, 12, 39]3.RNG
routers connect to each other and to external devices (e.g.,
servers, other fabrics). We break out each fabric-facing phys-
ical port into individual lanes (e.g., a 400 Gbps port into
4x100 Gbps lanes), each of which uses a separate fiber pair
and can establish adjacency with a different remote router.
Breakouts increase graph degree, lowering hop count and
oversubscription. In the rest of the paper, a router uplink
refers to a breakout lane.
3Further, unlike structured constructions like Xpander [ 49] and Slim fly
[4], random graphs can support routers with different degrees [45].RNG
supports such routers, but we omit this discussion for lack of space.
3


===== PAGE 4 =====
Graph 𝑛,𝑑 # of routers, router uplinks
Spraypoint 𝑝,ℎ # of waypoints, next hops
ℓ # of levels
ShuffleBoxes 𝑑𝑟 ,𝑑𝑐 # of r-ports, c-ports
𝑓𝑟 ,𝑓 𝑐 # of fiber pairs in r-port, c-port
Figure 2: Key design parameters ofRNG
The control plane and load balancing inRNGfollows to-
day’s common paradigm. The routing protocol, Spraypoint,
computes next hops at each router for all destinations; and
routers use ECMP (equal cost multipath) to spread traffic
across all next hops for the destination. Figure 2 summarizes
the key design parameters ofRNG.
5 SPRAYPOINT ROUTING
Spraypoint constructs a large number of edge disjoint paths
between endpoint pairs, which increases network through-
put by offering more independent options to load balanc-
ing mechanisms like ECMP. While we analyze and deploy
it on random graphs, Spraypoint works on any expander
graph. It is based on the observation that high fan-out at the
source and high fan-in at the destination suffice for creating
many edge-disjoint paths in an expander. The middle has
many edges because of the expansion property. Spraypoint
achieves high fan-out bysprayingpackets at the source—all
neighbors are eligible next hops and one is selected based on
ECMP hashing. It achieves high fan-in by channeling traffic
viawaypointsthat are spread all around the destination.
Forwarding paths. Spraypoint has two parameters𝑝 and
ℎ which control the number of waypoints per destination
and the number of eligible next hops after the spraying step.
These parameters offer a trade-off between path length and
the number of edge disjoint paths. There is an auxiliary pa-
rameterℓ which depends on these parameters and the graph
size (𝑛). To compute paths to a destination 𝑡, Spraypoint
partitions all nodes into the followinglevels.
(1)𝑊𝑃 0(𝑡): Base waypoint level with all neighbors of𝑡.
(2)𝑊𝑃 𝑙∈[1,ℓ](𝑡) : Higher-level waypoints. 𝑊𝑃𝑙(𝑡) has𝑝
randomly-selected neighbors of each node in𝑊𝑃𝑙−1(𝑡) . Neigh-
bors in earlier waypoint levels and𝑡 itself are not eligible for
selection.
(3)𝐼𝑅(𝑡) :Inner ringwith all neighbors of 𝑊𝑃 ℓ(𝑡) not in
previous levels.
(4)𝑂𝑅(𝑡) :Outer ringwith all nodes not in any level above.
Figure 3 shows an example graph forℓ=1 and𝑝=2.𝑊𝑃 0(𝑡)
has all neighbors of 𝑡:{𝑣1,𝑣 2,𝑣 3,𝑣 4}.𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) has two ran-
domly selected neighbors of each𝑣𝑖. In the example,𝑤1,𝑤 2
are selected from𝑣1,𝑤3,𝑤 4 are selected from𝑣2, and so on.
Node𝑣1 ends up with three neighbors in𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) , because
𝑡
𝑣1
𝑣2
𝑣3
𝑣4
𝑤1
𝑤2
𝑤3
𝑤4
𝑤5𝑤6
𝑤7
𝑤8
𝑟1
𝑟2
𝑟3
𝑟4
𝑟5
𝑟6
𝑟7𝑟8
𝑟9
𝑟10
𝑟11
𝑟12
𝑟13
𝑟14
𝑟15
𝑜1
𝑜2
𝑜3
𝑣𝑖 𝑊𝑃 0(𝑡)
𝑤𝑖 𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡)
𝑟𝑖 𝐼𝑅(𝑡)
𝑜𝑖 𝑂𝑅(𝑡)
Figure 3: Example graph with Spraypoint levels for𝑡.
an additional neighbor (𝑤8) was selected via𝑣4. The neigh-
bors of𝑣𝑖 that are not selected in𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) drop into the rings,
along with neighbors of𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡).
The levels control traffic flow between any source𝑠 to𝑡.
The first step isspraying, where 𝑠 forwards to a randomly
chosen neighbor (i.e., ECMP). Spraying is independent of
𝑡 and happens even if𝑠 and𝑡 are adjacent.4 Post spraying,
each intermediate node𝑢follows the "pointing" rules.
(1) If𝑢∈𝑊𝑃 0(𝑡), forward to𝑡.
(2) If𝑢∈𝑊𝑃 𝑙∈[1,ℓ](𝑡) , forward (ECMP) to one ofℎ neigh-
bors randomly selected from𝑊𝑃 𝑙−1(𝑡).
(3) If𝑢∈𝐼𝑅(𝑡) , forward to one ofℎ neighbors randomly
selected from𝑊𝑃 ℓ(𝑡).
(4) If𝑢∈𝑂𝑅(𝑡) , forward to one ofℎ neighbors randomly
selected from those with shortest paths to𝐼𝑅(𝑡)nodes.
Let us see Spraypoint forwarding in action for a packet
from𝑣2 to𝑡 in Figure 3. Assume ℎ= 1. First,𝑣2 sprays to
one of𝑡,𝑤3,𝑤4, or𝑜1. If the packet is sent to𝑡, its journey
is complete. If it is sent to𝑤3 or𝑤4, it will go back to𝑣2 per
the second rule above, and then to𝑡. Spraying happens only
at the source; if a packet happens to return to the source, it
follows the pointing rules. If the packet was sprayed to𝑜1, it
reaches𝑡via𝑟 6,𝑤 5, and𝑣 3.
Why spraying. Spraying exploits the expansion property
to generate many paths between source-destination pairs.
In general, there may be only a fewshortestpaths from a
source𝑠 to a destination 𝑡. But in an expander, there are
many edge disjointshortpaths between all pairs. A simple
heuristic to use these paths is to follow shortest paths to𝑡
from all neighbors of𝑠. Spraying implements this heuristic.
4Spraying is reminiscent of Valiant Load Balancing [50]. But unlike VLB,
which uses arbitrary nodes as intermediaries, it uses only neighboring nodes.
Its primary goal is high fan-out at the source, not load balancing, though
high fan-out does aid load balancing.
4


===== PAGE 5 =====
Why waypoints. Spraying alone fails in some cases. Sup-
pose𝑠 is a neighbor of 𝑡. After𝑠 sprays, its neighbors use
shortest paths to𝑡. Unfortunately, unless a neighbor is di-
rectly connected to 𝑡, which will be rare in a large graph,
the shortest paths go via𝑠. So almost all neighbors route the
traffic back to𝑠, and the𝑠→𝑡 link will congest. Higher-level
waypoints (𝑊𝑃𝑙∈[1,ℓ](𝑡) ) draw out traffic further, prevent-
ing a collapse on this link. Further, selecting 𝑝 of𝑑 nodes
builds a𝑝-ary forwarding graph rooted at each neighbor of𝑡,
which helps spread traffic across all neighbors (high fan-in).
Otherwise, some neighbors may not be used.
Settingℓ. To achieve the goals of spraying and waypointing,
we setℓ=max(1,⌈log𝑝(𝑛/2𝑑 2)⌉) . The size of the set𝑊𝑃 ℓ(𝑡)∪
𝐼𝑅(𝑡) will be at least𝑛/2for this choice of ℓ (§7), which re-
duces path lengths because each node in𝑂𝑅(𝑡) will connect
directly to this set with high probability.
Path length variability. Like other proposals for routing
in expander graphs [23, 45, 49], Spraypoint computes paths
of different lengths between a pair of endpoints. This vari-
ability will not impact single-path transport protocols like
TCP which sample only one path (based on ECMP), but it
could confuse multipath protocols [ 42, 44, 57] that spread
traffic across multiple paths (by varying packet headers used
by ECMP) if they use latency differential as a congestion
or load balancing signal. In a datacenter that spans 300 me-
ters and uses 100 Gbps links, a 2-hop path length difference
creates a maximum latency difference of 4.4𝜇𝑠 (0.7𝜇𝑠 trans-
mission time for a 9 KB packet, 1.5𝜇𝑠 propagation delay per
hop). This differential is low compared to endhost latencies
and a small amount of queuing (6 packets) will wipe it out.
Benchmarking on production fabrics confirms the absence
of performance issues for multipath protocols (§8).
Distributed implementation. Spraypoint permits a fully
distributed implementation as a link-state protocol, where
every node has a full view of the topology. Nodes can com-
pute levels for each destination and then compute local next
hops by applying the pointing rules. All nodes make identical
waypoint selections, via deterministic hashing of a shared
key, ensuring that all pointing graphs are loop free.
We implement spraying using VRFs (virtual routing and
forwarding), which enable different routing logic for different
interfaces. Unlike prior work that uses VRFs to create non-
shortest paths [ 23] (which does not scale), we need only
two VRFs. All server-facing interfaces of a router use a VRF
that sprays incoming traffic to all fabric-facing interfaces.
(One exception is traffic destined to servers connected to the
same router, which is forwarded directly to those servers.)
All fabric-facing interfaces use a second VRF that follows
the pointing rules. This setup allows a packet to revisit its
source (at most once) without looping indefinitely.
drr-portsfrFPs each. . . . 
dcc-ports fcFPs each
Figure 4: A ShuffleBox.
Resource requirements. Spraypoint uses two types of
router memory. The first is longest-prefix matching (LPM)
memory, which maps the destination address of an incoming
packet to an ECMP group id. LPM memory use depends on
the number of network prefixes and is similar to fat trees.5
The second type of memory is to map ECMP group id to
next hop set. Its required size depends on how ECMP groups
are setup. The two possibilities are: (1) a separate ECMP
group for each destination node, which consumes 𝑂(𝑛ℎ)
memory; and (2) pre-define all possible𝑑ℎ groups and use
the corresponding one for each destination, which consumes
𝑂(ℎ𝑑ℎ) memory. Based on𝑛 and𝑑, we pick the method that
supports the largerℎ while fitting in the memory. For 128-
port switches, the value of𝑑 is around 64, so a minimum of
ℎ=2 is always feasible independent of fabric size (ℎ𝑑ℎ≈ 8𝐾) .
The computational complexity of Spraypoint is𝑂(𝑛 2𝑑) per
node because each node inspects𝑛𝑑 edges per destination to
compute levels. The CPUs of modern commodity switches
can handle such complexity [29]. For comparison, the com-
plexity of k-shortest-paths routing is𝑂(𝑘𝑛 2(𝑑+log𝑛)) [54].
6 CABLING QUASI-RANDOM GRAPHS
We explain how quasi-random graphs are realized inRNG
after a brief background on datacenter cabling.
Datacenter cabling. Datacenter space is typically parti-
tioned into O(10)rooms(not necessarily with dividing walls).
Each room hosts some number of racks. Before server racks
land, the room ispreparedby installing power, cooling, and
basic cabling infrastructure including patch panels and inter-
room trunk cables. When server racks land, additional cables
are installed to connect them.
The cost and complexity of cabling stems from three main
factors: (1) the number of connectors and endpoint pairs,
where a patch panel is an endpoint and so is a ToR; (2) the
length of cables and the fraction that are intra- versus inter-
room—inter-room cabling is more expensive because it needs
extra infrastructure; and (3) the amount of cabling that can be
done during room preparation versus when racks land—later
cabling is riskier and slower.
5An exception is when hierarchy is leveraged to aggregate some prefixes.
Such aggregation is not feasible in flat expanders. Because LPM memory is
huge, it can support even the largest Amazon DCs without aggregation.
5


===== PAGE 6 =====
Figure 5: Cabling in a datacenter with three rooms.
Routers connect to r-ports of ShuffleBoxes in the room,
and ShuffleBoxes inter-connect via c-ports.
Physical connectivity inRNG. We build a quasi-random
graph using ShuffleBoxes (Figure 4). Each ShuffleBox has
𝑑𝑟 r-portsthat connect to routers and 𝑑𝑐 c-portsthat con-
nect to other ShuffleBoxes. R-ports and c-ports terminate,
respectively,𝑓𝑟 and𝑓𝑐 fiber pairs (FPs) each. An FP enables du-
plex communication between routers. ShuffleBoxes connect
FPs between r-ports and c-ports (𝑑𝑟×𝑓𝑟 =𝑑𝑐×𝑓𝑐). We describe
these parameter values later.
To connect routers via ShuffleBox, we deploy a set of Shuf-
fleBox, called ashuffle panel, in each room (Figure 5). Router
uplinks connect to randomly selected r-ports in the panel.
The c-ports of panels in different rooms are also randomly
connected. If there are𝑅 panels, each with𝐶 ShuffleBoxes,
we connect approximately (𝑅−1)𝐶𝑑 𝑐
𝑅 c-ports of each panel to
other panels, essentially building a random graph between
panels. Unconnected c-ports of a panel have aShuffleBack, a
special connector that bridges pairs of FPs coming into the
c-port (from r-ports). It bridges FP1 to FP2, FP3 to FP4, and
so on. Panel r-ports that are not connected to routers also
have a ShuffleBack that bridges c-port FP pairs. Routers con-
nect only to the ShuffleBoxes (never directly), and topology
modifications are achieved by changing only connections
between the ShuffleBoxes (as explained below).
Figure 6 shows three ways in which two routers can logi-
cally connect: (a) routers in the same room connect to the
same ShuffleBoxe and their FPs are shuffled to a c-port with
a ShuffleBack;6 (b) routers in different rooms whose FPs are
shuffled to connected c-ports; (c) routers whose FPs end up
at the same ShuffleBacked r-port in another room. In the
final pattern, the two ToRs may be in the same room.
Connecting via ShuffleBoxes has higher optical loss than
direct connectivity, but this loss is within the margins of
commodity transceivers. Our construction can produce even
longer end-to-end paths, e.g., if the right r-port in Figure 6c
had a ShuffleBack instead of connecting to a router, the path
6With random mapping of router uplinks to ShuffleBox r-ports, there is a
chance that two uplinks of the same router land on the same ShuffleBox
and are bridged via a c-port ShuffleBack. For realistic router counts, the
probability of self-edges is negligible since each ShuffleBox is small.
(a)(b)
(c)
Figure 6: Physical connectivity patterns that enable
logical connectivity. The hats denote ShuffleBacks.
will extend and go back out via a c-port. We disable paths
with over seven connectors to maintain optical signal quality.
Incrementally deploying rooms and racks.RNG’s phys-
ical connectivity can be done incrementally. §A describes
the process. To summarize the key steps: (1) install a new
shuffle panel when a new room is prepared; (2) if it is not the
first room, rebalance inter-panel connectivity by removing
some existing (randomly selected) c-port connections and
ShuffleBacks and using the opened c-ports to connect to the
new panel; and (3) when racks land in the room, connect
router uplinks to randomly selected r-ports.
ShuffleBox configuration. We use 𝑓𝑟 =4, the number of
breakout lanes for a 400 Gbps physical port. So that each
FP coming into an r-port from a router can reach different
places via different c-ports,𝑑𝑐 =𝑓𝑟 =4. We use𝑓𝑐=32 to balance
availability of commodity connectors (larger values are less
common) and effort to rebalance inter-panel connectivity
(small values increase effort). Finally, since𝑑𝑟×𝑓𝑟 =𝑑𝑐×𝑓𝑐, we
get𝑑𝑟 =32. With this configuration, the shuffling pattern of
ShuffleBoxes is simple: each c-port FP goes to a different
r-port, and each r-port FP goes to a different c-port (full
bipartite).
Cabling complexity.RNG’s cabling has low complexity
per the three factors outlined earlier. With𝑛 routers and𝑅
rooms, the number of physically-connected endpoint pairs
is𝑛+ 𝑅(𝑅−1)
2 as opposed to𝑛2 logically-connected pairs. We
count each shuffle panel as one endpoint because after the
trunk cables reach the panel, the intra-panel distribution
is simple. Inter-room cables are limited to 𝑅(𝑅−1)
2 trunks
between shuffle panels. Other than router to r-port connec-
tivity, all cabling can be done before racks land. Along these
factors, cabling complexity ofRNGis on par with fat trees.
Rebalancing inter-panel connectivity is a unique activity in
RNG, but it is needed only a small number of times, when
new rooms are prepared.
Cost. ShuffleBoxes and ShuffleBacks are novel passive optical
components thatRNGuses to simplify cabling. Being passive,
their cost is low relative to switches and transceivers and
6


===== PAGE 7 =====
similar to traditional patch panels [14] and loopbacks [15]
that are often used to simplify fat tree cabling.
Resulting graphs. The logical graph built using our physi-
cal construction is an optimal expander despite using deter-
ministic router-to-ShuffleBox connections and constraining
randomness (since c-port edges are balanced between rooms
and bundle edges between multiple router pairs. Because
each bundle has random routers and c-port connections are
random, our analysis confirms thatRNGtopologies have the
same spectral gap [53], a measure of expansion, as uncon-
strained random graphs.
7 MODELING PERFORMANCE
Following the standard practice for quasi-random graphs, our
analysis assumes that the graphs are truly random. The com-
bination of random graphs and spraying-induced decorrela-
tion enables modeling ofRNG’s performance. Our models
inevitably make simplifying assumptions but predict perfor-
mance quite accurately (§9). We summarize the key results in
this section and include details in the appendix. Our models
give approximate formulas that give accurate predictions
of the actual quantities. For convenience, we do not give
formal statements here, and defer all precise mathematical
statements and proofs to the appendix.
We consider operating regimes in which(𝑖) 2(ln(𝑛)+ 5)≤
𝑑≪𝑛 ,(𝑖𝑖)𝑝≥(𝑛/𝑑 2)1/ℓ, and(𝑖𝑖𝑖)ℎ≪𝑑 , whereℓ is the
number of waypoint levels in Spraypoint. (We used the sec-
ond criterion in §5 for settingℓ). Performance is predictable
in this regime because distributional tails due to randomness
are trimmed. At the same time, this regime is broad. Since
commodity switches support at least 128 breakout lanes [5, 6],
we can easily pick values of𝑑 that exceed the stated lower
bound (≈ 28for 𝑛=10K) for even large fabrics, and we can
pick compliant values of𝑝 andℎ . Further,ℓ=1 suffices for
𝑛=10K and typical values of𝑑 and𝑝. Our oversubscription
model focuses on that regime for simplicity.
7.1 Edge disjoint paths
Spraypoint exploits the expansion property to compute many
edge disjoint paths. The formal statement and proof are given
in §F.
Model 7.1.With high probability, the number of edge-
disjoint paths between𝑠and𝑡are approximated by:
(
𝑑(1−exp(−ℎ))if𝑠∉𝑊𝑃 0(𝑡)
min[𝑑−𝑝,𝑑(1−exp(−(1−𝑝/𝑑)ℎ))]if𝑠∈𝑊𝑃 0(𝑡)
A detailed explanation of this model is in §F, but we sum-
marize here. Consider𝑠∉𝑊𝑃 0(𝑡) (i.e., s is not a neighbor
of𝑡), and spraying a single packet to every neighbor of 𝑠.
The number of edge disjoint paths is closely related to the
0 1 2 3 4 5
Path length
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0CDF over paths
RNG, p=2
Model, p=2
RNG, p=16
Model, p=16
Figure 7: Path length distribution.
number of neighbors of𝑡 reached by these packets. Modeling
this process as a balls and bins calculation [52], where each
ball is thrownℎtimes, leads to the formula above.
When𝑠∈𝑊𝑃 0(𝑡) ,𝑝 neighbors of𝑠 are in𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) . When
traffic is sprayed by𝑠, the traffic to these waypoints poten-
tially comes back to𝑠. For the other𝑑−𝑝 neighbors, we get
a version of the balls and bins game.
Takeaways. (1) For both types of sources, the reduction in
the number of edge disjoint paths compared to the maximum
possible value of𝑑 is proportional to exp(−ℎ). Thus, a low
value ofℎ> 1suffices for good performance. The change in
exp(−ℎ) fromℎ=1 (0.37) toℎ=2 (0.13) is large, but it tapers
off rapidly asℎ increases. (2) For neighboring sources, high
values of𝑝reduce the number of edge disjoint paths.
7.2 Path length
Path lengths inRNGdepend on the sizes of various Spray-
point levels. A packet is sprayed to a random node, and the
number of pointing hops depends on the node’s level. We
can bound the resulting path length distribution.
Model 7.2.With high probability, the fraction of paths of
length𝑖is approximated by:
 

1/𝑛 𝑖=1
𝑝𝑖−2𝑑/𝑛2≤𝑖≤ℓ+2
exp(−𝑝ℓ𝑑 2/𝑛)𝑖=ℓ+4
rest𝑖=ℓ+3
§E has the proof, but Figure 7 compares the model to a
simulated fabric. It considers two values of𝑝, with𝑛=1K and
𝑑=64. The model matches the simulation well, especially for
𝑝= 2. When 𝑝𝑑>𝑛 , as for 𝑝=16, lower-order terms that
determine level sizes begin to matter. We ignore them for
simplicity, but our analysis can be extended if needed.
Takeaways. (1) Whenℓ= 1(practical regime), the maximum
path length is5, and5-hop paths are a negligible fraction
(e.g., exp(−𝑝𝑑 2/𝑛)≈ 0.0003for 𝑛=1K,𝑑=64,𝑝=2). (2) In this
regime, the average path length ofRNGis less than that
7


===== PAGE 8 =====
of 3-tier fat trees, where the vast majority of ToR-to-ToR
paths have 4 hops. (3)RNGpaths have variable lengths even
across thesameendpoint pair, unlike fat trees where all paths
between two endpoints are equal. (4)ℎ does not impact path
length.
7.3 Throughput (oversubscription ratio)
A key measure of a network’s throughput is oversubscrip-
tion ratio. It is the minimum fraction of traffic that the net-
work can deliver, without exceeding link capacities, across
all possible traffic matrices. Unlike for fat trees, one cannot
determine oversubscription for expander topologies through
a simple analysis of the graph structure.
Our oversubscription model uses two observations. First,
the worst case traffic matrix is amatchingwhere every
node sends at full rate to exactly one other node and re-
ceives at full rate from exactly one other (possibly different)
node [37]. We consider a matching with randomly selected
source-destination pairs, which can be viewed as modeling
stochasticoversubscription. This random traffic matrix might
not be the worst case. While matchings with long paths can
help find worse traffic matrices [ 25, 28], spraying inRNG
decorrelates path lengths.
The stochastic analysis is common in random graph theory—
argue that worst case for graph properties (e.g., cuts, expan-
sion, matchings) is close to the random case, using a union
bound argument [13, 34]. Second, the network throughput is
maximized for a given traffic matrix, or the oversubscription
ratio is minimized, when traffic takes the shortest possible
paths (Lemma G.2).
We estimate oversubscription by estimating𝜇𝑖 for each
flow in a random matching, where𝜇𝑖 is the maximum frac-
tion of flow carried by𝑖-hop paths. The details are in §G.2;
we summarize below.
We consider𝑖∈[ 2, 5] because the probability of length 1
paths is negligible and the maximum path length is 5 when
ℓ= 1(practical regime). We approximate 𝜇2 as𝑑/𝑛 because
each flow has𝑑/𝑛 fraction of 2-hop paths (Model 7.2). With
an assumption that paths do not overlap, we can show that
almost every such path carries a single unit of flow.
Estimating𝜇3 is more challenging because we cannot as-
sume that paths do not overlap. We first estimate 𝜙3, the
fraction of a source𝑠’s capacity along 3-hop paths after re-
moving the𝑑/𝑛 edges used by 2-hop paths, using the facts
that 3-hop paths are of the form𝑠→𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡)→𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡)→𝑡
and there are𝑝𝑑 waypoints. We then estimate𝜅3, the amount
of source-destination flow that such a path can carry, using
the distribution of path overlaps.
𝜙3 =min(𝑝𝑑/𝑛,1−𝑑/𝑛)·(1−𝑑/𝑛)·(1−(4𝑑/𝑛) ℎ)
𝜅3 =(1−𝜙 3)6/2+(1−𝜙 2
3)3/6+1/3
After similar polynomial calculations for𝜇 4,𝜇 5, we get:
Model 7.3.The oversubscription ratio is approximated by
(𝜇 2+𝜇 3+𝜇 4+𝜇 5)−1.
𝜇2 =𝑑/𝑛
𝜇3 =𝜙 3𝜅3 (see above)
𝜇4 =[1−(𝑝+1)𝑑/𝑛−exp(−𝑝𝑑 2/𝑛)]
·

1−[1−(1−2𝑑/𝑛)(1−(4𝑑/𝑛) ℎ)]ℎ

·(1−𝜇 2−2𝜇 3)/4
𝜇5 =exp(−𝑝𝑑 2/𝑛)(1−𝜇 2−2𝜇 3−3𝜇 4)/5
This model characterizes the mesh-layer (between routers)
oversubscription. For an end-to-end (server-to-server) analy-
sis, oversubscription at the ToRs must also be factored (§7.4).
Takeaways. Fabric oversubscription is a complex interplay
of all parameters. By capturing it for a wide range of pa-
rameter values,7 our model enables fabric design for specific
performance targets, which we discuss next.
7.4 Designing fabrics
While the exact procedure for determining the topology and
routing parameters (𝑛,𝑑,𝑝, andℎ) depends on desired trade-
offs (e.g., between oversubscription and path length), we
illustrate for a common target: minimize cost (fewest ToRs)
of connecting 𝑠 servers with an end-to-end oversubscrip-
tion ratio below𝑟𝑒 and ToR-layer oversubscription below𝑟𝑡
(1≤𝑟𝑡≤𝑟𝑒). Since ToRs are a localized congestion risk, opera-
tors usually want to control their oversubscription [40].
To meet the target above, we binary search for the minimal
viable value of𝑑 such that𝑑≥⌈ 𝑃
𝑟𝑡+1⌉,𝑑≥ 2𝑙𝑛(⌈ 𝑠
𝑃−𝑑⌉)+ 5),
and𝑑<𝑃 , where𝑃 is the number of router ports. The first
constraint ensures that ToR layer oversubscription, which
is 𝑃−𝑑
𝑑 :1, is below𝑟𝑡; the second ensures that the design is
within the modeled operating regime; and the third ensures
that at least one port is available for servers. Minimizing𝑑
subject to these constraints minimizes ToR count because it
maximizes𝑃-𝑑, the ports that connect to servers.
The viability of a value of𝑑 is determined as follows. Based
on𝑑, we compute the number of required ToRs𝑛 as⌈ 𝑠
𝑃−𝑑⌉.
We then determine the maximum value ofℎ that ToRs can
support based on𝑛,𝑑, and the ECMP memory size (§5). For
a given 𝑑,𝑛, and ℎ, the valid range of 𝑝 is[𝑛/𝑑2,𝑑] , and
different values yield different oversubscription ratios. We
compute the range of oversubscription ratios using Model 7.3
for extreme values of𝑝, and deem𝑑 as viable if𝑟𝑒/𝑟𝑡, which
is the desired mesh-layer oversubscription, falls in this range.
7The formulas can be simplified for specific regimes, e.g., when a parameter
is fixed. Forℎ=2,log 𝑑(𝑛/𝑝)+2approximates Model 7.3 well.
8


===== PAGE 9 =====
Figure 8: (a) One of the racks hosting the emulated
ShuffleBoxes. (b) Rows of emulated ShuffleBoxes. (c)
A ShuffleBack dongle with 4-FPs MPO connector.
Once we have the minimal viable𝑑, and corresponding𝑛,
ℎ, we use the maximum𝑝∈[𝑛/𝑑 2,𝑑] with oversubscription
less than𝑟𝑒/𝑟𝑡. Maximizing𝑝minimizes oversubscription.
8 PRODUCTION FABRICS
We have deployed theRNGdesign in two fabrics that carry
production workloads. The first, called the "server mesh",
connects ToRs as an expander. The second, called the "edge
mesh, " connects to the server mesh and to remote datacenters,
and it provides transit between these networks. Ports that
interconnect the twoRNGfabrics are spread across their
routers. We build separate fabrics because they have different
oversubscription targets. The edge mesh is non-blocking and
server mesh has the same oversubscription ratio as Amazon’s
latest fat tree fabrics. We elide the oversubscription level and
mesh sizes for confidentiality.
At the time of deploying these fabrics, we did not have
manufactured ShuffleBoxes. We emulated shuffling with a
traditional patch panel that bridges individual FPs and cus-
tom ShuffleBacks. See Figure 8.
Spraypoint performance. We implemented Spraypoint by
extending Amazon’s shortest-paths based link-state protocol.
We reused the topology dissemination component and mod-
ified next hop computation. For similarly-sized topologies,
Spraypoint performs similarly to the current protocol along
key metrics such as convergence time after a failure.
Cabling experience. CablingRNGusing the scheme in §6
was relatively smooth. One challenge was ensuring enough
ShuffleBoxes are installed in each room. The exact number
of racks, and thus router uplinks, that can land in a room
varies, depending on their power consumption. We used an
estimated upper bound on the number of router uplinks per
room.8
Due to a lack of structure and physically identifiable pat-
terns, a concern with random graphs has been operators
connecting ports not intended to be connected [45, 49]. The
incidence of such miscabling inRNGwas below 1.5%.
Operational challenges. We give a short preview of these
challenges, even though it is not a focus of this paper. Oper-
ationalizing random graphs required upgrading many soft-
ware tools that manage Amazon’s networks. The hierarchy
of fat trees was embedded deeply into these tools, starting
from device names itself to managing redundancy during
maintenance. For instance, ToRs in fat trees do not rely on
each other and can be upgraded based on concerns local to
the rack, but inRNGwe need to account for inter-ToR depen-
dencies and cannot simultaneously upgrade too many neigh-
bors of any given ToR. We ensured that fault localization
functions properly and built new tools to easily determine
the paths between ToRs for troubleshooting.
Application performance. A majority of traffic in hyper-
scale datacenters is moving toward multipath transport pro-
tocols [ 42, 44, 57]. The sender splits data across tens of
"flowlets" that use different paths in the network (based on
flowlet hash). The receiver assembles and orders the data,
transparent to the applications. The sender uses latency as
one of the signals when picking which flowlet to use.
Our main benchmarking goal is to validate that latency dif-
ferential across sender-receiver paths (§7.2) does not impact
performance. We study this by observing the raw throughput
of the transport protocol and the performance of a latency-
and throughput-sensitive block-storage application that uses
the protocol. We compareRNGagainst a production fat tree
fabric with identical oversubscription and identical server
specs. We normalized results by the mean values observed
for the fat tree to preserve confidentiality.
Figure 9 shows the throughput distribution based on an
experiment with 127 concurrent flows with infinite demand
between pairs of random servers. The results are identical
forRNGand fat tree. Any differences in path latencies of the
two networks are immaterial for application performance.
Figure 10 (left) compares the packets per second (PPS)
for small, 64-byte packets between pairs of servers.RNGis
slightly higher because it has less background traffic. Fig-
ure 10 (right) shows I/O operations per second (IOPS) for
8If this bound were breached, we plan to treat the remaining racks as belong-
ing to a new logical room and perform the room-addition activity. Analogous
provisioning challenges arise also for fat trees in large datacenters.
9


===== PAGE 10 =====
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
Normalized flow throughput (Gbps)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0CDF over flows Fat tree
RNG
Figure 9: Per-flow throughput of multipath transport
(normalized by the fat tree mean).
RNG Fat tree
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0Normalized PPS
RNG Fat tree
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0Normalized read IOPS
Figure 10: PPS of 64B packets (left) and IOPS of storage
reads (right). The error bars are standard deviations.
storage reads from clients to multiple servers.RNG’s perfor-
mance matches fat trees for this workload as well.
These benchmarks, and the absence of user-reported per-
formance issues, confirm thatRNGmatches fat tree perfor-
mance (at lower cost and higher fault tolerance).
9 BROADER EV ALUATION
Production fabric benchmarks can validate the performance
of real applications but we need simulations to evaluate a
broad range of design parameters and workloads. We bench-
markRNG’s oversubscription ratio and the number of edge
disjoint paths that Spraypoint produces. We also compare
its throughput and cost relative to fat trees.
9.1 Oversubscription
Oversubscription ratio characterizes worst-case throughput
of a network and helps quantify congestion risk. Namyar et
al. [37] prove that worst-case throughput occurs for a per-
fect unidirectional matching, where each node sends at full
rate to its counterpart. The authors do not suggest a way
to generate the worst matching among the many choices.
We randomly generate 100 matchings and estimate oversub-
scription using the worst value, though we will see that the
distribution is narrow because the topology and routing are
random [13, 34]. Similar to our oversubscription model, this
process characterizes stochastic oversubscription.
For a given matching, the oversubscription ratio is 𝑟 if
each transmitter can send at least1/𝑟 fraction of its full rate
without congesting any link. This measure is determined by
the smallest blocked flow, irrespective of whether others can
send more. We compute𝑟 by solving a linear program (LP)
that encodes a multi-commodity flow problem [56]. Traffic
for each flow is spread across Spraypoint paths, and the LP
minimizes𝑟 under link capacity constraints. These LPs are
huge and each takes multiple hours to solve, which limits
the largest fabrics we can practically study.
Figure 11 shows the results of simulations ("RNG") and
our model (§7.3). The line denotes the minimum value of
𝑟 for each setting. There is a shadow for the max but it is
barely visible because the variance is near zero. To study a
broad range of settings, we vary one parameter while the
others are set to default values ( 𝑛=1000,𝑑=64, 𝑝=4,ℎ=2).
This default can support 64K servers with 100 Gbps uplinks
and offers an oversubscription ratio of 3.25. We see that the
oversubscription ratio changes gracefully as we vary the
parameters, highlighting the ability of random graphs to
support fine-grained oversubscription levels. We also see
that the impact ofℎand𝑝flattens out beyond a point.
The model matches empirical results well, enabling perfor-
mance predictability. It allows operators to planRNGfabrics
like they plan fat trees today, with the added advantage
of lower cost, higher fault tolerance, and finer-grained per-
formance tuning. Some settings in Figure 11 are technically
outside the modeled regime, e.g.,𝑑= 20 ≱ 2(ln(𝑛= 1𝐾)+ 5).
We have defined the regime conservatively to get high prob-
ability results, and the models degrade gracefully outside the
regime.
9.2 Edge disjoint paths
Spraypoint aims to find many edge disjoint paths. We eval-
uate this ability by computing the min cut across paths be-
tween endpoint pairs, which equals the number of edge
disjoint paths [ 55]. Figure 12 shows the CDF of min cut
across endpoint pairs for the same default fabric parameters
as above (𝑛=1000,𝑑=64,𝑝=4,ℎ=2). For comparison, it also
shows𝑘-shortest-path routing (which is not implementable
at scale with commodity switches). We consider𝑘=8 [45, 49]
and𝑘=64, a high value that equals the node degree (and
needs 8x more resources).
For almost all endpoint pairs, Spraypoint finds over 50
edge disjoint paths. For half the pairs, it finds over 60 such
paths out of the maximum possible 64. In contrast, the me-
dian for 8-shortest-paths is 5 and for 64-shortest paths is
35. This difference impacts oversubscription directly. The
oversubscription for the two k-shortest-paths configurations
10


===== PAGE 11 =====
1000 2000 3000 4000
Value of n
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5Oversubscription ratio
16 32 48 64 80 96
Value of d
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
0 8 16 24 32
Value of p
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
0 4 8 12 16
Value of h
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
RNG
Model
Figure 11: Oversubscription for different topology parameters. The defaults are𝑛=1000,𝑑=64,𝑝=4,ℎ=2.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
# of edge disjoint paths
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
CDF over
endpoint pairs
8-shortest
64-shortest
Spraypoint
Figure 12: Edge disjoint path count.
are 21.3 and 4.7, while that for Spraypoint is 3.25. Spraypoint
is easier to implementandfinds a greater diversity of paths.
It offers higher peak throughput between endpoint pairs,
and offers higher network-wide throughput.
9.3 Throughput relative to fat trees
Beyond worst-case traffic patterns that help characterize
oversubscription, operators want to also validate perfor-
mance for other traffic patterns. This validation is hard be-
cause there are many possible traffic patterns. Our evaluation
is based on the observation that any traffic pattern may be
viewed as a combination of three basic types, and we can get
insight into the performance ofRNGfor a range of traffic
patterns by studying these types. The three types are:
• Clique:A group of nodes exchanges traffic amongst
themselves (e.g., collective communication like all-reduce,
replication traffic among storage servers).
• Hubs:Some nodes (e.g., Web or storage servers) send to
and receive from all other nodes.
• Matchings:Nodes send all traffic to exactly one other
node, as we studied earlier.
The nodes in the traffic patterns are ToRs, not individual
servers, because that stresses the fabric more [37].
Each pattern type is parameterized by active fraction 𝑓∈
[0, 1] to capture the skew. Clique( 𝑓 =0.2) means that the
clique size is 20% of the nodes (randomly selected); hubs(𝑓 =0.2)
means that 20% of the nodes in the network are hubs; and
matchings(𝑓 =0.2) means that 20% of the nodes are involved
in the matching. For each pattern type and𝑓 , all flows in the
traffic matrix (between a sender-receiver pair) are equal and
sum of rows and columns equal the local capacity of nodes.
Thus, each matrix is routable in a non-blocking fabric.
For each value of𝑓 , we generated 100 random traffic matri-
ces. We quantify performance for a matrix using the fraction
𝑟 as before—the network can carry at least1/𝑟 fraction of
each flow. Thus, we are computing the oversubscription ratio
of each matrix, instead of worst-case oversubscription ratio.
Figure 13 shows the results forRNGand fat tree. The lines
denote the mean and the shaded area denotes the min and
max. Both topologies are designed to support 61.4K servers
across 960 ToRs, with a worst-case oversubscription of 3:1.
In this configuration,RNGuses 45% fewer switches.
We see thatRNGperforms better by as much as 30% across
a wide regime for clique and hubs. The exceptions are cases
with 𝑓 <0.1, where fat tree is 5-10% better. For these cases,
shortest path routing on fat trees finds edge disjoint paths
that equal the ToR degree. The equivalent number is 10%
lower inRNGfor ℎ=2 (see §9.2). The number of edge disjoint
paths matters most when there are few senders in the net-
work. For matchings, fat tree is better when 𝑓 <0.4 andRNG
is better otherwise.
Amazon operators prefer the broadly better performance
ofRNG, especially given its lower cost and higher fault
tolerance. The regimes with low values of𝑓 , where fat tree
performs better, are acceptable because they will materialize
only when all servers in the rack act in unison, a rarity for
multi-tenant datacenters.
9.4 Cost relative to fat trees
Prior works report a range of values on the cost of expander
topologies relative to fat trees. These values are difficult to
compare because they use different performance measures
and network sizes. It is also difficult to get a holistic view
11


===== PAGE 12 =====
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Active fraction (f)
0
1
2
3
4Oversubscription ratio
Traffic pattern: clique
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Active fraction (f)
Traffic pattern: hubs
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Active fraction (f)
Traffic pattern: matchings
Fat tree
RNG
Figure 13: Oversubscription ratio (lower is better) for different traffic matrices. Both fat tree andRNGtopologies
are configured for worst-case oversubscription ratio of 3:1.RNGtopologies use 45% fewer switches.
2048 4096 8192
Num. servers
0
10
20
30
40
50Reduction (%)
32 ports
131K 262K 524K
Num. servers
128 ports
Oversub.
1:1
2:1
3:1
7:1
15:1
Figure 14: Reduction in number of switches inRNG
relative to a 3-tier fat tree for two different port counts.
because of their experimental methodology. Our models en-
able systematic analysis of the relative cost as a function of
oversubscription ratios and network sizes.
We use the ratio of the number of switches used by the
two topologies as the measure of relative cost. This measure
automatically includes transceivers, whose count is propor-
tional to switch count. It ignores passive optical components
like cables, connectors, and patch panels; the cost of these
components is in the minority and varies based on specific
cabling methods (e.g., if cables are trunked) in the datacenter.
Switch count is a general, reproducible measure.
We compute the number of switches needed forRNG
using the procedure in §7.4 and compare it to generalized
3-tier fat tree with the same oversubscription level. ToRs
are not oversubscribed in eitherRNGor fat trees. Figure 14
shows the results for different oversubscription levels and
two possible values of switch port counts. The highest server
count for each port count is the maximum supported by a
non-blocking fat tree [36], and the other two are 50% and 25%
of the servers. Oversubscription of 2:1 cannot be precisely
supported in fat trees with 32 or 128 port switches, but we
assume each port is 3-way splittable for this experiment.
The cost reduction varies by 5x, between 9 and 45%. It has
a similar pattern across port counts and network sizes, and
oversubscription ratio is the key determiner. The reduction is
low for the 1:1 oversub case because non-blocking fat trees do
not strand capacity; the reduction here primarily comes from
shorter paths inRNG. After increasing from oversubscription
of 1:1 to 3:1, the cost advantage starts decreasing slowly. For
high oversubscription, a fat tree has fewer switches at the
aggregation and spine tiers, which lowers the potential of
reducing cost by removing those tiers.
Our analysis makes it clear when expander topologies like
RNGbring the most or least value, allowing operators to
make informed choices about the type of topology to use.
10 RELATED WORK
We build on the foundations laid by a long line of prior re-
search. The notion of an expander, or an "optimal" graph for
routing purposes, was defined in the early 90s [ 24], and it
has been long known that random graphs are nearly-optimal
expanders [12]). Several researchers have proposed expander
topologies for datacenters and provided insights into their
performance [4, 25, 26, 37, 45, 49]. Particularly influential
works for us include Jellyfish [45], which proposed (truly)
random graphs for datacenters; Xpander [49], which made
the connection that random graphs do well for data cen-
ter workloads because they are expanders; and Namyar et
al. [37], who outlined throughput bounds of expander topolo-
gies. We extend this body of work by addressing unsolved
challenges related to routing, cabling, and performance pre-
dictability. We also deploy the first expander-based networks
in production.
Researchers have also proposed non-expander topologies
that tackle some of the challenges of the fat trees (e.g., cost),
such as HyperX [1], DCell [20], and BCube [19]. We choose
random graphs because they have significantly shorter path
lengths. Further, cabling these other topologies for large,
multi-room datacenters is still an open challenge.
12


===== PAGE 13 =====
Capacity fungibility, a key goal of theRNGdesign, can
be achieved using reconfigurable hardware as well. We use
expander topologies because they need neither a (logically)
centralized control plane nor non-standard hardware. Most
designs with reconfigurable hardware require a control plane
that predicts global traffic demands and dynamically recon-
figures the topology [11, 17, 21, 22, 51]. The scale of our data-
centers, presence of large amounts of bursty traffic (common
for Web workloads), and reconfiguration delays complicate
the development and operation of such control planes.
There are "demand-oblivious" designs that do not require
a centralized control plane [3, 31, 32]. They use novel optical
devices that rapidly cycle through a fixed schedule. All-to-
all connectivity is not available at any given time, and the
systems use forwarding via intermediate nodes based on
Birkhoff-von Neumann traffic matrix decomposition [7]. In
addition to relying on non-commodity hardware, these de-
signs bring a host of software risks such as time synchroniza-
tion, packet reordering within a TCP flow, some throughput
degradation [32], and switch-level congestion control [3].
11 CONCLUSIONS
Flat expander topologies based on quasi-random graphs
can be practically realized using the routing and cabling
approaches we developed. They can be designed for the de-
sired level of performance and cost using the models we
developed.
REFERENCES
[1] Jung Ho Ahn, Nathan Binkert, Al Davis, Moray McLaren, and Robert S
Schreiber. 2009. HyperX: topology, routing, and packaging of effi-
cient large-scale networks. InProceedings of the Conference on High
Performance Computing Networking, Storage and Analysis. 1–11.
[2] Mohammad Al-Fares, Alexander Loukissas, and Amin Vahdat. 2008.
A scalable, commodity data center network architecture. InProc. ACM
SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication. 63–74. doi:10 .1145/
1402958.1402967
[3] Hitesh Ballani, Paolo Costa, Raphael Behrendt, Daniel Cletheroe, Istvan
Haller, Krzysztof Jozwik, Fotini Karinou, Sophie Lange, Kai Shi, Benn
Thomsen, and Hugh Williams. 2020. Sirius: A Flat Datacenter Network
with Nanosecond Optical Switching. InProc. ACM SIGCOMM Confer-
ence on Data Communication. 782–797. doi:10.1145/3387514.3406221
[4] Maciej Besta and Torsten Hoefler. 2014. Slim fly: a cost effective
low-diameter network topology. InProceedings of the International
Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and
Analysis. 348–359. doi:10.1109/SC.2014.34
[5] Broadcom. 2026. Tomahawk 5 / BCM78900 series. https:
//www.broadcom.com/products/ethernet-connectivity/switching/
strataxgs/bcm78900-series [Retrieved 6-Feb-2026].
[6] Broadcom. 2026. Tomahawk3 / BCM56980 Series. https:
//www.broadcom.com/products/ethernet-connectivity/switching/
strataxgs/bcm56980-series [Retrieved 6-Feb-2026].
[7] Cheng-Shang Chang, Duan-Shin Lee, and Yi-Shean Jou. 2002. Load
balanced Birkhoff–von Neumann switches, part I: One-stage buffering.
Computer Communications25, 6 (2002), 611–622.
[8] F. R. K. Chung, R. L. Graham, and R. M. Wilson. 1989. Quasi-Random
Graphs.Combinatorica9, 4 (1989), 345–362.
[9] Devdutt Dubhashi and Alessandro Panconesi. 2009.Concentration of
Measure for the Analysis of Randomized Algorithms. Cambridge.
[10] Facebook. 2014. Introducing data center fabric, the next-generation
Facebook data center network. https://engineering .fb.com/2014/
11/14/production-engineering/introducing-data-center-fabric-
the-next-generation-facebook-data-center-network/ [Retrieved
6-Feb-2026].
[11] Nathan Farrington, George Porter, Sivasankar Radhakrishnan,
Hamid Hajabdolali Bazzaz, Vikram Subramanya, Yeshaiahu Fainman,
George Papen, and Amin Vahdat. 2010. Helios: a hybrid electrical/op-
tical switch architecture for modular data centers. InProc. ACM SIG-
COMM Conference on Data Communication. 339–350.
[12] Joel Friedman. 2008. A proof of Alon’s second eigenvalue conjecture
and related problems.J. of the American Mathematical Society195, 910
(2008).
[13] Alan M. Frieze and Páll Melsted. 2012. Maximum matchings in ran-
dom bipartite graphs and the space utilization of Cuckoo Hash tables.
Random Struct. Algorithms41, 3 (2012), 334–364.
[14] fs.com. 2019. Fiber Distribution Panel Wiki, Types and Buying
Tips. https://community .fs.com/article/fiber-distribution-panel-wiki-
buying-tips.html [Retrieved: 2026-02-06].
[15] fs.com. 2026. 8 Fibers MTP Female Type 1 OM4 50/125 Mul-
timode Fiber Loopback Module. https://www .fs.com/products/
35796.html?now_cid=2686 [Retrieved: 6-Feb-2026].
[16] Adithya Gangidi, Rui Miao, Shengbao Zheng, Sai Jayesh Bondu,
Guilherme Goes, Hany Morsy, Rohit Puri, Mohammad Riftadi,
Ashmitha Jeevaraj Shetty, Jingyi Yang, Shuqiang Zhang, Mikel Jimenez
Fernandez, Shashidhar Gandham, and Hongyi Zeng. 2024. RDMA
over Ethernet for Distributed Training at Meta Scale. InProc. ACM
SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication. 57–70. doi:10 .1145/
3651890.3672233
[17] Monia Ghobadi, Ratul Mahajan, Amar Phanishayee, Nikhil Devanur, Ja-
nardhan Kulkarni, Gireeja Ranade, Pierre-Alexandre Blanche, Houman
Rastegarfar, Madeleine Glick, and Daniel Kilper. 2016. Projector: Ag-
ile reconfigurable data center interconnect. InProc. ACM SIGCOMM
Conference on Data Communication. 216–229.
[18] Albert Greenberg, James R. Hamilton, Navendu Jain, Srikanth Kan-
dula, Changhoon Kim, Parantap Lahiri, David A. Maltz, Parveen Patel,
and Sudipta Sengupta. 2009. VL2: a scalable and flexible data center
network. InProc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication.
51–62. doi:10.1145/1592568.1592576
[19] Chuanxiong Guo, Guohan Lu, Dan Li, Haitao Wu, Xuan Zhang, Yun-
feng Shi, Chen Tian, Yongguang Zhang, and Songwu Lu. 2009. BCube:
a high performance, server-centric network architecture for modular
data centers. InProc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communica-
tion. 63–74.
[20] Chuanxiong Guo, Haitao Wu, Kun Tan, Lei Shi, Yongguang Zhang,
and Songwu Lu. 2008. Dcell: a scalable and fault-tolerant network
structure for data centers. InProc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data
Communication. 75–86.
[21] Daniel Halperin, Srikanth Kandula, Jitendra Padhye, Paramvir Bahl,
and David Wetherall. 2011. Augmenting data center networks with
multi-gigabit wireless links. InProc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on
Data Communication. 38–49.
[22] Navid Hamedazimi, Zafar Qazi, Himanshu Gupta, Vyas Sekar, Samir R
Das, Jon P Longtin, Himanshu Shah, and Ashish Tanwer. 2014. Firefly:
A reconfigurable wireless data center fabric using free-space optics. In
Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication. 319–330.
13


===== PAGE 14 =====
[23] Vipul Harsh, Sangeetha Abdu Jyothi, and P. Brighten Godfrey. 2020.
Spineless Data Centers. InProc. ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Net-
works (HotNets). 67–73. doi:10.1145/3422604.3425945
[24] Shlomo Hoory, Nathan Linial, and Avi Wigderson. 2007. Expander
graphs and their applications.Bulletin of the AMS43 (2007), 439–561.
[25] Sangeetha Abdu Jyothi, Ankit Singla, P Brighten Godfrey, and Alexan-
dra Kolla. 2016. Measuring and understanding throughput of network
topologies. InProceedings of the International Conference for High Per-
formance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC). 761–772.
[26] Simon Kassing, Asaf Valadarsky, Gal Shahaf, Michael Schapira, and
Ankit Singla. 2017. Beyond fat-trees without antennae, mirrors, and
disco-balls. InProc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communica-
tion. 281–294. doi:10.1145/3098822.3098836
[27] Allan Kaye. 2025. Rail-Optimised Networking: How NVIDIA
is Rethinking AI Network Design in the Data Centre.
https://vespertec.com/news/rail-optimised-networking-how-
nvidia-is-rethinking-ai-network-design-data-centre/ [Retrieved
3-Feb-2026].
[28] Murali Kodialam, TV Lakshman, and Sudipta Sengupta. 2011. Traffic-
oblivious routing in the hose model.IEEE/ACM Transactions on Net-
working19, 3 (2011), 774–787.
[29] Alexander Krentsel, Nitika Saran, Bikash Koley, Subhasree Mandal,
Ashok Narayanan, Sylvia Ratnasamy, Ali Al-Shabibi, Anees Shaikh,
Rob Shakir, Ankit Singla, and Hakim Weatherspoon. 2024. A Decentral-
ized SDN Architecture for the WAN. InProc. ACM SIGCOMM Confer-
ence on Data Communication. 938–953. doi:10.1145/3651890.3672257
[30] Hong Liu, Ryohei Urata, Kevin Yasumura, Xiang Zhou, Roy Bannon, Jill
Berger, Pedram Dashti, Norm Jouppi, Cedric Lam, Sheng Li, Erji Mao,
Daniel Nelson, George Papen, Mukarram Tariq, and Amin Vahdat. 2023.
Lightwave Fabrics: At-Scale Optical Circuit Switching for Datacenter
and Machine Learning Systems. InProc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference
on Data Communication. 499–515. doi:10.1145/3603269.3604836
[31] William M Mellette, Rajdeep Das, Yibo Guo, Rob McGuinness, Alex C
Snoeren, and George Porter. 2020. Expanding across time to deliver
bandwidth efficiency and low latency. InUSENIX Symposium on Net-
worked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI). 1–18.
[32] William M. Mellette, Alex Forencich, Rukshani Athapathu, Alex C.
Snoeren, George Papen, and George Porter. 2024. Realizing RotorNet:
Toward Practical Microsecond Scale Optical Networking. InProc. ACM
SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication. 392–414. doi:10 .1145/
3651890.3672273
[33] Jeffrey C. Mogul and John Wilkes. 2023. Physical Deployability Matters.
InProc. ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks (HotNets). 9–17.
doi:10.1145/3626111.3628190
[34] Rajeev Motwani and Prabhakar Raghavan. 2001.Randomized Algo-
rithms. Cambridge University Press.
[35] Jayaram Mudigonda, Praveen Yalagandula, Mohammad Al-Fares, and
Jeffrey C. Mogul. 2010. SPAIN: COTS data-center Ethernet for multi-
pathing over arbitrary topologies. InUSENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI). 18.
[36] Jayaram Mudigonda, Praveen Yalagandula, and Jeffrey C. Mogul. 2011.
Taming the Flying Cable Monster: A Topology Design and Optimiza-
tion Framework for Data-Center Networks. InUSENIX Annual Techni-
cal Conference. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:2989246
[37] Pooria Namyar, Sucha Supittayapornpong, Mingyang Zhang, Minlan
Yu, and Ramesh Govindan. 2021. A throughput-centric view of the per-
formance of datacenter topologies. InProc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference
on Data Communication. 349–369. doi:10.1145/3452296.3472913
[38] Sabine R Ohring, Maximilian Ibel, Sajal K Das, and Mohan J Kumar.
1995. On generalized fat trees. InProc. International Parallel Processing
Symposium. 37–44.
[39] Doron Puder. 2014. Expansion of random graphs: new proofs,
new results.Inventiones mathematicae201, 3 (Dec. 2014), 845–908.
doi:10.1007/s00222-014-0560-x
[40] Kun Qian, Yongqing Xi, Jiamin Cao, Jiaqi Gao, Yichi Xu, Yu Guan,
Binzhang Fu, Xuemei Shi, Fangbo Zhu, Rui Miao, Chao Wang, Peng
Wang, Pengcheng Zhang, Xianlong Zeng, Eddie Ruan, Zhiping Yao, En-
nan Zhai, and Dennis Cai. 2024. Alibaba HPN: A Data Center Network
for Large Language Model Training. InProc. ACM SIGCOMM Confer-
ence on Data Communication. 691–706. doi:10.1145/3651890.3672265
[41] Brandon Schlinker, Radhika Niranjan Mysore, Sean Smith, Jef-
frey C. Mogul, Amin Vahdat, Minlan Yu, Ethan Katz-Bassett, and
Michael Rubin. 2015. Condor: Better Topologies Through Declar-
ative Design.. InProc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Com-
munication. 449–463. http://dblp .uni-trier.de/db/conf/sigcomm/
sigcomm2015.html#SchlinkerMSMVYK15
[42] Leah Shalev, Hani Ayoub, Nafea Bshara, and Erez Sabbag. 2020. A
Cloud-Optimized Transport Protocol for Elastic and Scalable HPC.
IEEE Micro40, 6 (2020), 67–73. doi:10.1109/MM.2020.3016891
[43] Arjun Singh, Joon Ong, Amit Agarwal, Glen Anderson, Ashby Armis-
tead, Roy Bannon, Seb Boving, Gaurav Desai, Bob Felderman, Paulie
Germano, Anand Kanagala, Jeff Provost, Jason Simmons, Eiichi Tanda,
Jim Wanderer, Urs Hölzle, Stephen Stuart, and Amin Vahdat. 2015.
Jupiter Rising: A Decade of Clos Topologies and Centralized Control
in Google’s Datacenter Network. InProc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference
on Data Communication. 183–197. doi:10.1145/2785956.2787508
[44] Arjun Singhvi, Nandita Dukkipati, Prashant Chandra, Hassan M. G.
Wassel, Naveen Kr. Sharma, Anthony Rebello, Henry Schuh, Praveen
Kumar, Behnam Montazeri, Neelesh Bansod, Sarin Thomas, Inho
Cho, Hyojeong Lee Seibert, Baijun Wu, Rui Yang, Yuliang Li, Kai
Huang, Qianwen Yin, Abhishek Agarwal, Srinivas Vaduvatha, Wei-
huang Wang, Masoud Moshref, Tao Ji, David Wetherall, and Amin Vah-
dat. 2025. Falcon: A Reliable, Low Latency Hardware Transport. InProc.
ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication(São Francisco
Convent, Coimbra, Portugal). 248–263. doi:10.1145/3718958.3754353
[45] Ankit Singla, Chi-Yao Hong, Lucian Popa, and Philip Brighten Godfrey.
2012. Jellyfish: Networking Data Centers Randomly. InProceedings
of the 9th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Im-
plementation (NSDI). 225–238. https://www .usenix.org/conference/
nsdi12/technical-sessions/presentation/singla
[46] snaketray.com. 2026. The Essential Guide to Data Center Cabling.
https://www.snaketray.com/data-center-cabling-guide/ [Retrieved
6-Feb-2026].
[47] F. Solano, R. Fabregat, Y. Donoso, and J.L. Marzo. 2005. Asymmetric
tunnels in P2MP LSPs as a label space reduction method. InIEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC), Vol. 1. 43–47 Vol. 1.
doi:10.1109/ICC.2005.1494318
[48] F. Solano, R. Fabregat, and J.L. Marzo. 2005. Full label space reduction in
MPLS networks: asymmetric merged tunneling.IEEE Communications
Letters9, 11 (2005), 1021–1023. doi:10.1109/LCOMM.2005.11016
[49] Asaf Valadarsky, Gal Shahaf, Michael Dinitz, and Michael Schapira.
2016. Xpander: Towards Optimal-Performance Datacenters. InProc.
International on Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments
and Technologies (CoNEXT)(Irvine, California, USA). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 205–219. doi:10 .1145/
2999572.2999580
[50] Leslie G Valiant and Gordon J Brebner. 1981. Universal schemes for par-
allel communication. InProc. ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing
(STOC). 263–277.
[51] Guohui Wang, David G. Andersen, Michael Kaminsky, Konstantina
Papagiannaki, T.S. Eugene Ng, Michael Kozuch, and Michael Ryan.
2010. c-Through: part-time optics in data centers. InProc. ACM SIG-
COMM Conference on Data Communication. 327–338. doi:10 .1145/
14


===== PAGE 15 =====
1851182.1851222
[52] Wikipedia. 2026. Balls into bins problem. https://en .wikipedia.org/
wiki/Balls_into_bins_problem [Retrieved 6-Feb-2026].
[53] Wikipedia. 2026. Expander graph. https://en .wikipedia.org/wiki/
Expander_graph [Retrieved 6-Feb-2026].
[54] Wikipedia. 2026. k-shortest path routing. https://en .wikipedia.org/
wiki/K_shortest_path_routing [Retrieved: 6-Feb-2026].
[55] Wikipedia. 2026. Menger’s Theorem. https://en .wikipedia.org/wiki/
Menger%27s_theorem [Retrieved: 6-Feb-2026].
[56] Wikipedia. 2026. Multi-commodity flow problem. https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-commodity_flow_problem [Retrieved:
6-Feb-2026].
[57] Damon Wischik, Costin Raiciu, Adam Greenhalgh, and Mark
Handley. 2011. Design, Implementation and Evaluation of
Congestion Control for Multipath TCP. InUSENIX Sympo-
sium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI).
https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi11/design-implementation-
and-evaluation-congestion-control-multipath-tcp
[58] Nicholas Wormald. 1999.Models of Random Regular Graphs. Cam-
bridge. https://web.williams.edu/Mathematics/sjmiller/public_html/
ntprob19/handouts/graphs/Womald_ModelsRandomGraphs.pdf
[59] Eitan Zahavi. 2012. Fat-tree routing and node ordering providing
contention free traffic for MPI global collectives.J. Parallel and Dis-
trib. Comput.72, 11 (2012), 1423–1432. doi:10 .1016/j.jpdc.2012.01.018
Communication Architectures for Scalable Systems.
[60] Xia Zhou, Zengbin Zhang, Yibo Zhu, Yubo Li, Saipriya Kumar, Amin
Vahdat, Ben Y Zhao, and Haitao Zheng. 2012. Mirror mirror on the ceil-
ing: Flexible wireless links for data centers.ACM SIGCOMM Computer
Communication Review42, 4 (2012), 443–454.
A INCREMENTAL CABLING
The physical connectivity ofRNGdescribed in §6 can be
achieved incrementally. While the first room of the data-
center is being prepared, we deploy its patching panel. The
number of ShuffleBoxes in the panel is based on the number
of ToR uplinks expected in the room. Initially, all r-ports
and c-ports have ShuffleBacks in them. When racks land in
the room, ToRs are connected to random r-ports, as part of
which the ShuffleBacks of selected r-ports are removed. The
ToRs start forming a random graph via c-port ShuffleBacks,
as in Figure 6(a). Not all ToR uplinks may find a match during
this process (more on this below).
While the second room is being prepared, we land its
shuffle panel and connect those c-ports to the panel in the
first room. If panels are equal-sized, half of the c-ports in
each must connect to the other panel; otherwise, we adjust
proportionally. The ports are picked randomly. The c-port
connections are enabled by the trunk cables between the two
rooms. Making these connections requires removing Shuf-
fleBacks from c-ports, as a result of which the connectivity
pattern for some ToRs may go from Figure 6(a) to Figure 6(c),
except that both ToRs are in the same room.
When racks can land in the second room, those ToRs
connect to random r-ports in the second room’s panel. Some
of these ToR uplinks will connect to ToRs in the first room
via c-port connections, as in Figure 6(b); some will connect
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Fraction of T oRs deployed
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Fraction of
matched uplinksRoom 1 Room 2 Room 3 Room 4 Room 5
Figure 15: Matched uplinks as the datacenter grows.
to other ToRs in the same room via c-port ShuffleBacks; and,
at least initially, some will fail to find a match.
When the third room starts, we land its panel and rebal-
ance c-port connectivity. When there were two rooms, half
of the first room’s c-ports connected to the second room.
When the third room starts, a third must go to the second
room and a third to the third room (and a third have Shuf-
fleBacks). To rebalance c-port connectivity, we break some
existing c-port connections (selected randomly) between the
first two rooms and use the freed up c-ports to connect to the
third room. We follow the same process of landing panels
and rebalancing connectivity for all subsequent rooms.
Rebalancing connectivity breaks logical links that carry
live traffic. We thus drain impacted links to minimize impact.
Strictly speaking, logical connectivity changes when racks
land and r-port ShuffleBacks are removed, but the blast radius
of that operation is much smaller (𝑓𝑟 =4 versus𝑓 𝑐=32).
A.1 Growing pains
An artifact of our incremental construction is that early in
the growth of the datacenter, not all ToR uplinks form valid
adjacencies. For an uplink in room 1 to form an adjacency, it
must connect to an r-port FP that is bridged (by the Shuffle-
Box’s c-port ShuffleBack) to an r-port connected to another
uplink. When only a small fraction of r-ports are populated,
this probability is low. A similar effect occurs for the second
room but is less severe because half of ToR uplinks connect
to r-port FPs that are connected to the first room via c-ports
and find matches there.
Figure 15 plots the fraction of deployed uplinks with valid
adjacencies as we deploy more ToRs. This simulated data-
center has 10 rooms with 100 ToRs each. We see the fraction
of uplinks in room 1 that find a match increases linearly.
After room 2 opens, there is an initial dip in the fraction of
matched uplinks because room 2 ToRs have fewer matched
uplinks and their ratio in the population is growing. But
the lowest point in the dip is still above 90%. The impact is
negligible beyond room 2.
15


===== PAGE 16 =====
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Fraction of T oRs deployed
0
5
10
15Oversub. ratioRoom 1 Room 2 Room 3 Room 4 Room 5
W/o phases
With phases
Figure 16: Oversubscription as the datacenter grows.
We present a model of datacenter expansion that accu-
rately predicts the average degree at each point in the data-
center growth. Operators can use the model to predict the
average degree during expansion and plan accordingly.
As the "W/o phases" curve of Figure 16 shows, these grow-
ing pains lead to poor early throughput for room 1 (and room
1 only). Amazon operators view this behavior as acceptable
for fast-growing datacenters. The window of poor perfor-
mance is short and they can delay on-boarding applications.
But the poor early performance can be problematic for
slow-growing datacenters. For these cases, we propose a
modified cabling scheme. We partition the ShuffleBoxes of
the first room’s shuffle panel into two or more phases. Initial
ToRs connect only to phase 1 ShuffleBoxes. When these
ShuffleBoxes are full, we connect the c-ports of phase 1 and
phase 2 ShuffleBoxes and start mapping future ToRs to phase
2 ShuffleBoxes. This process is repeated for future phases.
It essentially divides a room into smaller, logical rooms and
shrinks the poor performance window.
The "With phases" curve of Figure 16 shows the impact of
phased cabling. We partitioned room 1 into two phases, and
the size of the first phase was 30% of the room. This config-
uration is optimal when operators want average degree of
the datacenter to always stay above 0.8 as soon as 25% of the
racks in room 1 are deployed. Next, we show how to derive
optimal phase sizes for user-defined performance criteria.
A.2 Modeling expansion
We present a model of datacenter expansion that predicts
the average degree of the fabric at each point in time. The
expansion occurs instages, where each stage corresponds
to the landing of new panels of ShuffleBoxes and associated
re-cabling. Routers of a stage only connect to ShuffleBoxes of
that stage. A stage could be a room or a phase within a room,
and the analysis makes no assumption about the number or
relative sizes of various stages.
We model datacenter expansion using “time"𝑡as the pri-
mary variable, where𝑡∈[ 0, 1] is the fraction (relative to the
full DC) of routers currently landed. We denote a stage that
begins at𝑡1 and ends at𝑡2 as[𝑡1,𝑡 2]. Abusing notation, we
will simply denote a router by its timestamp of arrival. Each
router has𝑑uplinks.
During the first stage, when there are no routers from
previous stages, the probability of a ToR uplink finding a
match increases linearly because the probability depends on
bridging to an occupied r-port which grows linearly with𝑡.
The average degree of the fabric at time𝑡 is d 𝑡
𝑇0
, where𝑇0 is
the size of the first stage.
For subsequent stages, the following invariants hold about
RNG’s datacenter expansion:
(1) At the end of any stage, the graph degree is𝑑 because
all routers would have found a match.
(2) During a stage, all routers from previous stages main-
tain their degree of𝑑.
(3) When a router on a stage lands, only some of its up-
links find a match. On expectation, that fraction is the
fraction of routers present. Formally, for stage[𝑡1,𝑡 2],
there are𝑡1 routers from previous stages, and we will
land routers 𝑡1+ 1,𝑡 1+ 2,...,𝑡 2. The 𝑖-th router in
this stage will make (on expectation) a 𝑡1+𝑖
𝑡2
fraction of
connections when it lands.
Based on these invariants, we can prove:
Model A.1.The average degree during the stage [𝑡1,𝑡 2]
(𝑡1 >0) is𝑑
h
𝑡1
𝑡 + 𝑡−𝑡 1
𝑡2
i
Proof. The stage[𝑡1,𝑡 2] begins with a𝑡1 fraction of routers
connected (with degree 𝑑) and ends with a 𝑡2 fraction of
routers. At time 𝑡∈[𝑡 1,𝑡 2], all routers with timestamp at
most𝑡1 always have a degree of 𝑑, and the routers of the
current stage will have, on average, a degree of𝑑𝑡/𝑡 2. The
fraction of routers with timestamp at most𝑡1 is𝑡1/𝑡, and the
fraction of routers of the current stage is(𝑡−𝑡 1)/𝑡.
Thus, the average degree at time𝑡is:
𝑡1
𝑡 ·𝑑+ 𝑡−𝑡 1
𝑡 ·𝑑𝑡
𝑡2
=𝑑
h𝑡1
𝑡 +𝑡−𝑡 1
𝑡2
i
(1)
□
Figure 17 compares Model A.1 with a simulated fabric
from Figure 16. We see that the model matches simulations
well, and the curves are virtually indistinguishable.
A.3 Computing optimal phases
The expansion model enables us to find optimal phases. We
formulate the problem as: Find the minimum number of
phases and their sizes such that the average degree is at least
𝛼𝑑 when at least a𝛽-fraction of the first room is deployed.
The parameters𝛼and𝛽are operator-provided inputs.
We solve the problem by applying Model A.1 to the first
room, treating each phase as a stage. We know that the
average degree increases linearly in the first stage. So, if
16


===== PAGE 17 =====
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Fraction of T oRs deployed
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Fraction of 
matched uplinksRoom 1 Room 2 Room 3 Room 4 Room 5
RNG: W/o phases
RNG: With phases
Model: W/o phases
Model: With phases
Figure 17: Comparison of fraction of uplinks that find
a match based on simulation of Figure 15 versus what
is predicted by the model.
𝛼≤𝛽 , we only require a single phase (i.e., not using phases
at all). If𝛼>𝛽 , our aim is to maximize𝛼 for a given𝛽, or
equivalently, minimize𝛽for a given choice of𝛼.
Let us now consider the case of two phases in a room.
Theorem A.1.With two phases in a room, for a given 𝛼, the
minimum possible𝛽 is𝛼( 1−
√
1−𝛼) 2. Further, the minimum
occurs when the size of the first phase is𝛽/𝛼.
Proof. Let us first observe that the formula in Model A.1
is a hyperbola (𝑡1/𝑡+𝑡/𝑡 2). Its minimum is at the geometric
mean√𝑡1𝑡2, so the minimum average degree is:
𝑑(2
√︁
𝑡1/𝑡2−𝑡 1/𝑡2)(2)
Let us now denote the minimum possible𝛽 as𝛽∗. In the
first phase, the average degree increase linearly. At time𝛽∗,
it needs to be at least𝛼𝑑. This phase ends when the average
degree is𝑑, which happens when time is 𝛽∗/𝛼, which we
denote using𝑥 for convenience. At this point, the next phase
begins and continues to the end of the room.
If the end of room deployment as𝑡= 1, we have the stage
being[𝑥, 1]. Applying Equation 2, the minimum average
degree is𝑑( 2√𝑥−𝑥 ). Since we require the average degree
to be𝛼𝑑at all times,2 √𝑥−𝑥≥𝛼.
Consider the quadratic 𝑓(𝑥)=𝑥− 2√𝑥+𝛼 . We need to
choose𝑥 so that𝑓(𝑥)≤ 0, which happens after the first root
of the quadratic. The roots of𝑓(𝑥)are
2±
√
4−4𝛼
2 =1±
√
1−𝛼
The smaller root is1−
√
1−𝛼 , and we need𝑥 to be at least
this value. Plugging in the expression for𝑥,
√︂
𝛽∗
𝛼 ≥1−
√
1−𝛼=⇒𝛽 ∗≥𝛼(1−
√
1−𝛼) 2
□
For a better understanding of the formula in Theorem A.1,
Figure 18 plots the optimal𝛽 versus𝛼. We see if we want the
degree to be at least0.8𝑑, we can get that as soon as𝛽≈ 25%
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0( (1 1 )2)
Figure 18: The minimum 𝛽 achievable, for a given 𝛼 in
a two-phase deployment
Latency differential0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0CDF over paths
Estimated
Measured
Figure 19: Comparison between estimated latency
based on datacenter layout and measurements on the
production fabric. Units omitted for confidentiality.
of the room is deployed. This performance can be obtained
if the first phase is≈30% of the first room.
If the𝛽∗ of the two-phase deployment does not meet the
operator criterion, we can perform a similar analysis for suc-
cessively higher number of phases until we find the number
of phases where the criterion is met. These iterations are
guaranteed to terminate. In the extreme, each router is its
own phase and the graph degree is always𝑑.
B LATENCY REDUCTION
While expander topologies have fewer hops than fat trees, we
find that when deployed in a large datacenter their latency
can be worse because hops can be long (half the datacenter
length on average). The higher propagation delay exceeds
what is saved in switching costs due to fewer hops.
To demonstrate this challenge, we simulate a datacenter
with a span of 300 meters and 4K ToRs spread across 10
equally-sized rooms. ForRNG, the patching panels are lo-
cated in the center of each room. The fat tree has 4 tiers.
ToRs connect to aggregation pods with two tiers of switches,
17


===== PAGE 18 =====
4 6 8 10
Latency ( s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0CDF over paths
Fat tree
RNG (baseline)
RNG (biased
waypoints)
RNG (biased
waypoints, cabling)
Figure 20: Latency distribution of ToR-to-ToR paths
where the bottom tier connects to ToRs and the top tier to
spine routers. Aggregation pods are located in the center
of each room to serve the ToRs in the room, and all spine
routers are in one room in the middle of the datacenter [10].
For both topologies, the link speed is 100 Gbps and cables
travel along cable trays [ 46]. Figure 19 validates the accu-
racy of our latency estimation methodology by comparing
what it estimates for the production server mesh (§8) with
measurements on the fabric.
While the fat tree has 6 hops andRNGhas 4 hops for
the vast majority of ToR pairs in the simulated datacenter,
Figure 20 shows that the median one-way latency of ("RNG
(baseline)") is 15% higher (8.4 vs. 7.1𝜇𝑠). This difference may
seem small, but it compounds over round trips for applica-
tions and so datacenter operators are sensitive to it.
Simple modifications to routing and cabling reduce the
latency ofRNGwithout compromising performance.
Biased waypoint selection. When selecting waypoints,
instead of picking𝑝 random neighbors of𝑣∈𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡) , pre-
fer waypoints closer to𝑡. We implement this preference by
ranking each candidate waypoint𝑤 using𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑚_𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑤,𝑣)+
𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑚_𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑣,𝑡) , where𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑚_𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡() is the distance between
rooms of the two nodes. Using coarse, room-level distances,
instead of actual fiber runs, avoids systematically preferring
advantageously-located waypoints (e.g., close to cable trays).
Biased cabling. We lower the number of inter-room connec-
tions, which are longer than intra-room ones. Specifically,
a patching panel makes𝛼× 1
𝑅×𝐶×𝑑 𝑐 c-port connections
to another panel, where𝐶,𝑅,𝑑𝑐 are the number of Shuffle-
Boxes, rooms, and c-ports per ShuffleBoxes, and𝛼∈[ 0, 1] is
a parameter that controls the amount of inter-room connec-
tions. For the baseline construction,𝛼= 1. We use𝛼= 0.5,
which reduces number of inter-room connections by half. It
reduces latency without hurting throughput because there is
still enough inter-room capacity. Another positive side-effect
of this optimization is that it reduces (by1−𝛼 ) the number of
inter-room cables, an important factor behind cabling costs.
Figure 20 shows that the combination of these modifica-
tions makes the median latency ofRNGsimilar to that of
the fat tree. Biased waypoint selection reduces the median
latency by 0.3𝜇𝑠and biased cabling by a further 1𝜇𝑠.
Latency can be further reduced by limiting spraying to a
subset of neighbors that have shorter paths to the destination
and by selecting theℎ next hops in a distance-aware manner.
But, unlike the two modifications above, these modifications
reduce, respectively, the number of edge disjoint paths and
throughput for some traffic matrices. They must thus be used
only in settings where reduced performance is acceptable.
We experimented with a few other ideas, such as spraying
to only a subset of close neighbors and biasing the selection
ofℎ random next hops, but they either reduced throughput
or did not bring substantial benefit.
C MODELING OVERVIEW
Our modeling ofRNGprioritizes simpler formulas over math-
ematical precision. It makes numerous modeling assump-
tions and performs asymptotic analysis (as𝑛 gets large) that
ignores lower order terms in some situations. We constrain
the operating regime to where the inaccuracy of these as-
sumptions and asymptotics is minimal. Recall from §7 that
this regime is (i)2(ln(𝑛)+ 5)≤𝑑≪𝑛 , (ii)𝑝≥(𝑛/𝑑 2)1/ℓ,
and (iii)ℎ≪𝑑 , where𝑛 and𝑑 are the node count and degree.
Further, given random topology and routing, the analysis is
inherently probabilistic, i.e., results hold with high probabil-
ity and can fail with low probability.
The following sections derive the performance models in
§7 in a stepwise manner.
Random graph preliminaries (§D):The first step of the
modeling is to define a probabilistic process that generates
the random network topology. We give a precise formulation,
since this forms the foundation of the analysis. We prove
some basic theorems about the graph construction. This
section is purely using random graph theory, and does not
involve any asymptotics or modeling of Spraypoint/routing.
Modeling path length (§E):We begin the actual analysis
by giving formulas for the sizes of various Spraypoint levels.
The random graph theorems from §D are used to determine
the structure of the Spraypoint levels and their sizes. The
path length distributions follow quite directly from these
formulas. These formulas use asymptotics to get convenient
expressions. This yields Model 7.2.
Modeling edge disjoint paths (§F):Armed with the
tools from the previous sections, we can analyze the mincut
properties between a source-destination pair. For this analy-
sis, we make some minor modeling assumptions, to represent
the flow as a tractable balls and bins problem. A detailed,
tight analysis of these problems has been done before [13],
but we observe that a simpler upper bound formula is close
enough. This bound is given in Model 7.1.
18


===== PAGE 19 =====
Modeling oversubscription (§G):The most difficult part
of our analysis is bounding the oversubscription ratio. For
this analysis, we use many modeling assumptions (detailed
in §G.1). The oversubscription ratio is the output of a multi-
commodity flow linear program, so it is much harder to get
a simple formula. Moreover, the mathematics of interacting
flows is complex and we resort to various simplifications
based on intuitions on random graphs. Our final formula is
given by a collection of polynomial equations in the various
parameters, as given in §7.3.
D RANDOM GRAPH PRELIMINARIES
The router graph 𝐺=(𝑉,𝐸) has 𝑛 nodes and degree 𝑑.
We model its construction as a random configuration graph
(Chap. 2 of [58]). There are various ways to construct graphs
in the configuration model, all of which are statistically equiv-
alent and provide convenient analytical tools.
• The standard method: consider each node as incident
to𝑑 “half-edges". Paired half-edges result in a proper edge.
We generate a pairing with a uniform random permutation
of all half-edges, and matching the first to the second, the
third to the fourth, and so on.
• Getting the neighborhood of a set𝑆: Condition on some
edges within𝑆. Each remaining half-edge in 𝑆 picksinde-
pendentlyanother uar (uniformly at random) half-edge in
graph to pair with. If multiple 𝑆 half-edges pick the same
partner to pair with, only one them (picked randomly) will
pair up. The others remain unpaired. At this stage, some of
the half-edges in𝑆 have paired up. Now, we simply pair up all
remaining half-edges in the graph using the standard method
(which has dependencies). The first part makes a collection
of independent decisions, allowing for easier analysis.
D.1 Probability preliminaries
We list some probability theory definitions and theorems
used in the analysis. In what follows, capital letters𝑋,𝑌,𝑍
denote non-negative integer-valued random variables;E[𝑋]
denotes the expectation of𝑋 . script lettersE,F,... denote
events; andPr[E]denotes the probability of eventE.
The first theorem will help us derive expected values of
a collection of random variables. It makes no independence
assumption on the random variables.
Theorem D.1.[Linearity of Expectation] For any finite
collection of random variables 𝑋1,𝑋 2,...,𝑋 𝑘 ,E[Í
𝑖≤𝑘 𝑋𝑖]=Í
𝑖≤𝑘 E[𝑋𝑖].
The next theorem is convenient for dealing with “error
bounds" and bounding the probability of bad events.
Theorem D.2.[Union bound] Given a finite collection of
eventsE 1,E 2,...,E 𝑘 ,Pr[ Ð
𝑖≤𝑘E𝑖]≤ Í
𝑖≤𝑘 Pr[E𝑖].
The following states classicconcentration inequalitiesthat
upper bound the probability of a random variable deviating
significantly from its expectation.
Theorem D.3.[The Chernoff bound] (Theorem 1.1 of [ 9])
Let 𝑋= Í
𝑖≤𝑘 𝑋𝑖 , where the 𝑋𝑖 ’s are independent random
variables in[0,1]. Then,
• For all 𝜀∈( 0, 1), Pr[𝑋<( 1−𝜀) E[𝑋]] , Pr[𝑋>( 1+
𝜀)E[𝑋]]≤exp(−𝜀 2E[𝑋]/3).
• For all 𝑡, Pr[𝑋> E[𝑋]+𝑡] , Pr[𝑋< E[𝑋]−𝑡]≤
exp(−2𝑡 2/𝑘).
•If𝑡>2𝑒E[𝑋], thenPr[𝑋>𝑡]≤2 −𝑡 .
We use the phrasewith high probabilityto denote prob-
ability at least1 −𝑜( 1), with asymptotics over increasing
𝑛.
D.2 Random graph tools
We state and prove some probabilistic graph theorems that
will be useful in the analysis.
Claim D.4.Consider a node set 𝑆. Condition on any choice of
edges within𝑆 that leave𝑘 half-edges unpaired. The probability
that a vertex𝑣∉𝑆 is a neighbor of 𝑆 is at least1−exp(−𝑘/𝑛) .
Proof. Conditioned on the current choice of edges in𝑆,
let us consider the process of building the neighbors of𝑆. As
described above, in the first step of this process, each of the
𝑘 half-edges incident to𝑆 picks a uar unpaired half-edge to
pair with. Fix𝑣∉𝑆 . Let us look at the probability that a single
iteration connects with one of the𝑑 half-edges incident to𝑣.
This probability is at least𝑑/𝑛𝑑=1/𝑛.
Since there are 𝑘 independent iterations, one for each
unpaired half-edge incident to 𝑆, the probability that no
iteration connects with𝑣 is at most(1− 1/𝑛)𝑘. Applying the
inequality1−𝑥≤exp(−𝑥) , we upper bound by exp(−𝑘/𝑛) .
Thus, the probability of 𝑣 connecting to 𝑆 is at least1 −
exp(−𝑘/𝑛).□
Let us unpack this expression. Using the approximation
(for small 𝑥), exp(−𝑥)≈ 1−𝑥 , roughly speaking, we can
approximate as1−(1−𝑘/𝑛)=𝑘/𝑛.
The following claim shows that all sets of sufficiently large
size connect with every other node. It is a special case of the
proof that the configuration model generates expanders.
Claim D.5.Fix subset 𝑆⊆𝑉 and condition on any choice
of edges within𝑆 that leaves at least 𝑛𝑑/4unpaired half-edges
incident to𝑆. With probability at least1 −𝑛−4, every𝑣∈𝑉\𝑆
has an edge to𝑆.
Proof. By Claim D.4, the probability that𝑣∉𝑆 isnota
neighbor of𝑆 is at most exp(−𝑘/𝑛)≤exp(−𝑑/ 4). Let event
E𝑣 occur when𝑣 does not connect to𝑆. By the union bound
Pr[Ð
𝑣∉𝑆E𝑣] ≤Í
𝑣∉𝑆 Pr[E𝑣] ≤𝑛exp(−𝑑/ 4) ≤𝑛−4 (since
19


===== PAGE 20 =====
𝑑≫ln𝑛 ). The event Ð
𝑣∉𝑆E𝑣 occurs precisely when all
vertices outside𝑆have an edge to𝑆.□
E MODELING PATH LENGTH
This section models the path lengths in theRNGfabrics. We
begin by bounding the sizes of Spraypoint levels.
E.1 Level sizes
Let us fix a destination𝑡, and for convenience, denote𝑊𝑃𝑖(𝑡)
as𝑊𝑃𝑖. We imagine constructing the levels incrementally, to-
gether with the graph. So𝑊𝑃≤𝑖 := Ð
𝑗≤𝑖𝑊𝑃 𝑗 is constructed,
and then we choose the randomness to construct 𝑊𝑃𝑖+1.
Conditioning on𝑊𝑃≤𝑖 implies fixing the graphinside 𝑊𝑃≤𝑖.
So we have fixed all the edges between the waypoints up to
this level. Then𝑊𝑃𝑖 chooses some of its edges to determine
𝑊𝑃𝑖+1. It is convenient to set𝑊𝑃 0 to be𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡).
We state and prove our main theorem about level sizes.
Recall thatℓ:=max(1,⌈log 𝑝(𝑛/2𝑑2)⌉).
Theorem E.1.Fix destination 𝑡. The following bounds hold
with probability≥1−𝑜(1). We set𝜆:=𝑝 ℓ𝑑 2/𝑛.
•For0≤𝑖≤ℓ,|𝑊𝑃 𝑖(𝑡)|=(1±𝑜(1))𝑑𝑝 𝑖 .
• |𝑂𝑅(𝑡)|≤(exp(−𝜆)+𝑜(1))𝑛.
•All nodes in𝑂𝑅(𝑡)have an edge to a node in𝐼𝑅(𝑡).
The proof has a few moving parts, so we separate them
out. For any set of nodes𝑆, we use𝑁(𝑆) to denote the neigh-
borhood of𝑆(which may include nodes in𝑆).
Claim E.2.For any 𝑖, condition on |𝑊𝑃≤𝑖| ≤𝑛/𝑑. The
probability that any node 𝑣 has more than𝑑/2edges to 𝑊𝑃≤𝑖
is at most1/𝑛.
Proof. The node𝑣 makes𝑑 connections. Consider choos-
ing these randomly as follows. First, each half-edge incident
to𝑣 chooses to connect with a node in 𝑊𝑃≤𝑖 with proba-
bility|𝑊𝑃≤𝑖|/𝑛≤ 1/𝑑. Once these choices are made, then
the half-edges are paired to a random half-edge in𝑊𝑃≤𝑖 or
𝑊𝑃≤𝑖 respectively. Each of these choices can be represented
as a Bernoulli𝑋𝑖, and the sum𝑋= Í
𝑖≤𝑑 𝑋𝑖 is the number of
edges𝑣has into𝑊𝑃 ≤𝑖.
We note thatE[𝑋] ≤ 1. By the Chernoff bound Theo-
rem D.3, Pr[𝑋≥𝑑/ 2]≤ 2−𝑑/2. By a union bound over all
nodes, the probability that any node has more than𝑑/2edges
is at most𝑛2−𝑑/2. Since𝑑≥2(ln𝑛+5),𝑛2 −𝑑/2≤𝑛−5.□
The following lemma encapsulates a key calculation.
Lemma E.3.Condition on a set 𝑆 of nodes with at least half
of its incident half-edges unpaired. Let |𝑆|≥𝑑/ 2. Consider
pairing all the half-edges incident to 𝑆. Then, with probability
at least1 −𝑛−10,|𝑁(𝑆)| ≥min(𝑛/ 4,|𝑆|𝑑/ 4). Moreover, if
|𝑆|≤𝑛/𝑑 , at least(𝑑− 4)|𝑁(𝑆)| half-edges incident to 𝑁(𝑆)
are left unpaired.
Proof. We will perform a coupling of the random variable
|𝑁(𝑆)| as follows. We initially mark an arbitrary set of𝑛/4
nodes. We pair the half-edges incident to𝑆 iteratively. If a
pairing connects to an unmarked nodeandthe number of
current neighbors of 𝑆 is <𝑛/ 4: we pick an marked non-
neighbor of𝑆, unmark it, and marked the (new) unmarked
neighbor. (Otherwise, we do not change the marking.) Thus,
if there are fewer than𝑛/4neighbors of 𝑆, then all neighbors
of𝑆are marked.
For the𝑟th half-edge paired, let𝑋𝑟 be the indicator of the
𝑟th half-edge pairing with an unmarked node. Since the num-
ber of marked nodes is exactly𝑛/4, the number of unmarked
nodes is also exactly3𝑛/4. Hence, Pr[𝑋𝑟 = 1]= 3/4. Recall
that there are at least𝑘≥|𝑆|𝑑/ 2unpaired half-edges inci-
dent to𝑆 Let𝑋= Í
𝑟≤𝑘 𝑋𝑟 , soE[𝑋]= 3𝑘/4. By the Chernoff
bound of Theorem D.3, Pr[Í
𝑟𝑋𝑟≤𝑘/ 2]≤exp(− E[𝑋]/( 3·
32))≤exp(−|𝑆|𝑑/ 54)≤exp(−𝑑 2/108). Since𝑑≥ln𝑛 , this
probability can be bounded by𝑛−10 (for sufficiently large𝑛).
So, with high probability,𝑋≥𝑘/ 2≥|𝑆|(𝑑/ 4). This means
that either each iteration connected to an unmarked node
(thereby creating a new neighbor) or the number of neigh-
bors was at least𝑛/4. Thus,|𝑁(𝑆)|≥min(𝑛/4,|𝑆|𝑑/4).
If|𝑆|≤𝑛/𝑑 , then|𝑆|/|𝑁(𝑆)|≤ 4/𝑑. We paired up at most
|𝑆|𝑑 half-edges in the above random process. Hence, there are
at least|𝑁(𝑆)|𝑑−|𝑆|𝑑=|𝑁(𝑆)|𝑑− 4|𝑁(𝑆)|≥(𝑑− 4)|𝑁(𝑆)|𝑑
half-edges incident to𝑁(𝑆)that are unpaired.□
E.1.1 The first bullet point of Theorem E.1.We prove the
first bullet point by an induction over𝑖. We require a stronger
induction hypothesis. We will prove that, conditioned on a
choice of𝑊𝑃𝑖 that leaves at least𝑑|𝑊𝑃 𝑖|/2half-edges un-
paired, with high probability, the construction of𝑊𝑃𝑖+1 en-
sures that|𝑊𝑃𝑖+1|≥( 1−𝑜( 1))𝑝𝑑𝑖+1 and at least𝑑|𝑊𝑃 𝑖+1|/2
half-edges of𝑊𝑃 𝑖+1 are unpaired.
We now perform the induction. We first deal with the
base case𝑊𝑃 0, the neighbor set. Consider the pairing the𝑑
half-edges incident to𝑡, one by one. Take the𝑟th half-edge
being paired. There are at most𝑑 neighbors of𝑡 already con-
structed, by the pairing of previous half-edges. The probabil-
ity that the𝑟th half-edge connects to one of these neighbors
is at most𝑑/𝑛, regardless of all the previous choices. Let𝑍
be the random variable denoting the number of half-edges
connecting to an existing neighbor. The upper tail probabili-
ties of𝑍 is dominated by the corresponding tail of𝐵(𝑑/𝑛,𝑑) .
(Here, 𝐵(𝑘,𝛼) denotes the binomial of 𝑘 independent tri-
als with success probability𝛼.) We can apply the Chernoff
bound to 𝐵(𝑑/𝑛,𝑑) . Let 𝑌∼𝐵(𝑑/𝑛,𝑑) . Note thatE [𝑌]=
(𝑑/𝑛)·𝑑=𝑑 2/𝑛. Since𝑑≪𝑛 , for sufficiently small𝜀> 0,
𝜀𝑑≥ 2𝑒𝑑 2/𝑛. By Theorem D.3, Pr[𝑌≥𝜀𝑑]< 2−𝜀𝑑 =𝑜( 1).
Thus, Pr[𝑍≥𝜀𝑑]≤Pr[𝑌≥𝜀𝑑]=𝑜( 1). In words, the over-
all probability of the half-edges connecting to 𝜀𝑑 existing
20


===== PAGE 21 =====
neighbors is𝑜( 1). So, with probability1−𝑜( 1), the size of
the neighbor set𝑊𝑃 0 is at least(1−𝑜(1))𝑑.
At this stage, there are(𝑑− 1)|𝑊𝑃 0| unpaired half-edges
incident to𝑊𝑃 0. The only paired half-edges (formed edges)
are those incident to𝑡, so each neighbor in𝑊𝑃 0 is incident
to(𝑑−1)unpaired half-edges.
We split into two cases, depending onℓ.
Case 1,ℓ= 1: In this case, there is just𝑊𝑃 1 to consider. As
argued above, with high probability,|𝑊𝑃 0|=𝑑−𝑜( 1) and it
is incident to|𝑊𝑃 0|(𝑑− 1) unpaired edges. Apply Lemma E.3
with𝑆=𝑊𝑃 0 =𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡) . So probability >𝑛 −10,|𝑁(𝑆)|≥
min(𝑛/4,|𝑆|𝑑/ 4). Observe that 𝑝𝑑≤𝑛/ 4and 𝑝≤𝑑/ 4. So,
𝑝𝑑≤|𝑁(𝑆)| . There are enough candidates to construct𝑊𝑃 1
as desired. There is no induction necessary, since this is the
last waypoint level. This ends the proof for this case.
Case 2, ℓ> 1: Note that ℓ=⌈log 𝑝(𝑛/2𝑑 2)⌉. Pick some
𝑖<ℓ . We inductively assume that for all 𝑗≤𝑖 ,|𝑊𝑃 𝑗|=
(1−𝑜( 1))𝑝𝑑𝑗 and that there are at least|𝑊𝑃𝑖|𝑑/2unpaired
edges in the construction thus far. We just proved this for
the base case. At each step of the induction, there is a small
probability of error (< 1/𝑛5). We will simply union bound
all these errors over the at mostℓ=Θ(ln𝑛)levels.
Observe that|𝑊𝑃𝑖|≤𝑑𝑝 𝑖≤𝑑𝑝 log𝑝(𝑛/2𝑑 2)≤𝑛/ 2𝑑. Also,
|𝑊𝑃≤𝑖| ≤Í
𝑗≤𝑖 𝑑𝑝𝑗 =𝑑(𝑝 𝑖+1− 1)/(𝑝− 1). Since 𝑝≥ 2,
𝑝− 1≥𝑝/ 2. Hence, Í
𝑗≤𝑖|𝑊𝑃𝑖|≤𝑑𝑝 𝑖+1/(𝑝/ 2)≤ 2𝑑𝑝𝑖 ≤
(2+𝑜(1))|𝑊𝑃 𝑖|.
We apply Lemma E.3 with 𝑆=𝑊𝑃 𝑖. Note that|𝑆|≥𝑑
and|𝑆|≤𝑛/ 2𝑑. At least half of the incident half-edges are
unpaired. Hence, with probability > 1−𝑛−10,|𝑁(𝑊𝑃 𝑖)|≥
|𝑊𝑃𝑖|𝑑/4. Since|𝑊𝑃≤𝑖|≤ 2|𝑊𝑃𝑖|, there are at least(𝑑/4−
2)|𝑊𝑃 𝑖|≥|𝑊𝑃 𝑖|𝑝 (since𝑝+ 2≤𝑑/ 4) nodes that are neigh-
bors of𝑊𝑃𝑖 andnotin 𝑊𝑃≤𝑖. These are all candidates for
𝑊𝑃𝑖+1. Thus, we can construct𝑊𝑃𝑖+1 as desired. We get that
|𝑊𝑃𝑖+1|=𝑝|𝑊𝑃 𝑖|=(1±𝑜(1))𝑑𝑝 𝑖+1.
At least(𝑑− 4)|𝑁(𝑊𝑃 𝑖)| half-edges incident to𝑁(𝑊𝑃 𝑖)
are unpaired. It remains the bound the number of unpaired
half-edges incident to𝑊𝑃𝑖+1. Observe that a uniform random
node of𝑁(𝑊𝑃 𝑖) has at least(𝑑− 4) unpaired half-edges. Let
𝑍𝑟 be the random variable denoting the fraction of unpaired
edges on the𝑟th node of𝑊𝑃𝑖+1. We haveE[𝑍𝑟]≥ 1−𝑑/ 4.
Setting𝑍= Í
𝑟𝑍𝑟 ,E[Í
𝑟𝑍𝑟]≥( 1−𝑑/ 4)|𝑊𝑃 𝑖+1| by linearity
of expectation. Applying Theorem D.3, Pr[𝑍< E[𝑍]/ 2]≤
exp(−( 1/3· 22)·( 1−𝑑/ 4)|𝑊𝑃 𝑖+1|). Since|𝑊𝑃𝑖+1|≥( 1−
𝑜( 1))𝑝𝑑𝑖+1 and𝑖≥ 0, the probability is exp(−Θ(𝑑))≤𝑛 −4.
Thus, we have at least 𝑑|𝑊𝑃 𝑖+1|/2unpaired half-edges in-
cident to𝑊𝑃𝑖+1. We union bound over all the errors. This
completes the induction, and the proof of the first bullet.
E.1.2 The other bullets of Theorem E.1.With high prob-
ability,|𝑊𝑃𝑖|=( 1±𝑜( 1))𝑑𝑝𝑖. We will simply assume this
property, and union bound the errors. Hence, the set𝑊𝑃 ℓ is
incident to at least(1−𝑜(1))𝑑 2𝑝ℓ half-edges. By Claim D.4,
the probability that a node isnota neighbor of 𝑊𝑃 ℓ is
at most exp(−( 1−𝑜( 1))𝑑 2𝑝ℓ/𝑛)=exp(−𝜆( 1−𝑜( 1)))=
(1+𝑜( 1))exp(−𝜆) . For node𝑣, let𝑋𝑣 be the indicator ran-
dom variable that 𝑣 is not a neighbor of 𝑊𝑃 ℓ. Note that
E[𝑋𝑣]≤(1+𝑜(1))exp(−𝜆).
Consider the graph construction process where each𝑣 first
independently chooses to connect to𝑊𝑃 ℓ. Then, if possible,
the graph is formed conditioned on these choices. Setting
𝑋= Í
𝑣𝑋𝑣, we can apply the Chernoff bound of Theorem D.3.
So Pr[|𝑋− E[𝑋]|>𝑛/ln𝑛]≤ 2 exp(−2𝑛/ln2𝑛), which is a
tiny probability. Therefore, with high probability, the number
of neighbors of𝑊𝑃 ℓ is close to the expectation, and hence,
the graph can be feasibly formed conditioned on the the
choices of𝑋 𝑣.
Thus, with high probability, the graph construction pro-
cess is feasible, and the number of non-neighbors of 𝑊𝑃 ℓ
is at most(1+𝑜( 1))exp(−𝜆)𝑛+𝑛/ln𝑛=exp(−𝜆)𝑛+𝑜(𝑛) .
Observe that all nodes in𝑂𝑅(𝑡) are non-neighbors of𝑊𝑃 ℓ,
so this completes the proof of the second bullet.
Now for the third bullet. We can bound
𝜆≥𝑝 ⌈log𝑝(𝑛/2𝑑 2)⌉𝑑 2/𝑛≥1/2
As shown earlier, with high probability,|𝑂𝑅(𝑡)|≤(exp(−𝜆)+
𝑜( 1))𝑛≤ 0.7𝑛. Hence, at least0 .3𝑛≥𝑛/ 4nodes lie in the
remaining levels, waypoints or𝐼𝑅(𝑡) . Claim D.5 asserts that
every node is a neighbor of these remaining levels with high
probability. So every node is either a neighbor of a waypoint
or𝐼𝑅(𝑡) . Nodes in𝑂𝑅(𝑡) are by definition not neighbors of
waypoints, and hence must be neighbors of𝐼𝑅(𝑡) . We union
bound over all the errors, each of which was <𝑛−5. We per-
form the union bound at most𝑛2 log𝑛 times (once for each
source, once for each destination, and once for each level).
That bounds the error probability as𝑛−3 log𝑛<𝑛 −2.
E.2 Path length distribution
We now compute the distribution of Spraypoint path lengths.
Theorem E.4.Fix a destination 𝑡. Consider the distribution
of path lengths seen by a packet sprayed uniformly at random
from a uniform random source 𝑠. With high probability, the
distribution of Spraypoint paths to a destination 𝑡 is as follows:
•There are𝑑paths of length1.
• For every2 ≤𝑖≤ℓ+ 2, there are(1±𝑜( 1))𝑝𝑖−2𝑑 2 paths
of length𝑖.
• There are at most(1+𝑜( 1))exp(−𝜆)𝑛𝑑 paths of length
ℓ+4.
•All other paths have lengthℓ+3.
Proof. Consider the pointing structure. Theorem E.1 gives
the sizes of each level in this structure. We will assume the
21


===== PAGE 22 =====
bounds and statements of Theorem E.1. Imagine routing traf-
fic from every possible source to the destination𝑡. The spray-
ing step would send traffic along all edges. For each edge, let
us track the length to the destination.
Any edge incident to 𝑡 leads to a path of just length1,
which gives𝑑 paths of length1. If an edge incident to𝑊𝑃𝑖(𝑡) ,
the path to the destination has length 𝑖+ 2(one step for
spraying and(𝑖+ 1) steps along the waypoints leading to𝑡).
Edges incident to𝐼𝑅(𝑡) lead to paths of lengthℓ+ 3. Finally,
by Theorem E.1, observe that all nodes in𝑂𝑅(𝑡) have an edge
to𝐼𝑅(𝑡) but not to any waypoints. Hence, edges incident to
𝑂𝑅(𝑡) give Spraypoint paths of lengthℓ+ 4. We can use the
level size bounds of Theorem E.1 to complete the proof. □
The bounds in Model 7.2 are expressed as fractions. For
a destination𝑡, there are𝑛𝑑 possible paths to consider, one
per source and spray operation. So we divide all the bounds
in Theorem E.4 by𝑛𝑑to get the fractions in Model 7.2.
F MODELING EDGE DISJOINT PATHS
In this section, we estimate the number of edge disjoint paths
between a source𝑠 and destination𝑡 by estimating the min
cut of Spraypoint paths between𝑠 and𝑡. We first set up some
notation.
Definition F.1.For every𝑣≠𝑡, we define the𝑡-parent as:
•For𝑣∈𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡), the parent is𝑡.
• For𝑣∈𝑊𝑃 𝑖(𝑡) (𝑖≥ 1): we pick ℎ uar neighbors in
𝑊𝑃𝑖−1(𝑡)as the parents.
• For𝑣∈𝐼𝑅(𝑡) : we pick up toℎ uar neighbors of𝑣 that
are waypoints (excluding{𝑡}∪𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡)).
•For𝑣∈𝑂𝑅(𝑡): we pickℎrandom neighbors in𝐼𝑅(𝑡).
(Ifℎ selections cannot be made, we make the largest possible.)
Recall that the routing algorithm is simple. The first step
is Spraying. After that, as part of pointing, a packet is for-
warded to a uar parent. Eventually, the packet reaches𝑡. This
leads to some natural definitions of Spraypoint paths, from
which we can define the graph between the endpoints.
Definition F.2.Fix a destination 𝑡. For any𝑣, the Spraypoint
path to𝑡 is any path obtained by repeatedly taking𝑡-parents
until ending at𝑡.
• Thepointing graph P𝑡 has all edges that forward traf-
fic to𝑡.
• For a source-destination pair (𝑠,𝑡) , theSpraypoint
graphS𝑠,𝑡 has all incident edges to𝑠 and the union of Spray-
point paths from𝑁(𝑠)to𝑡.
We work withℓ= 1setting. We make some asymptotic as-
sumptions consistent with our parameters. The assumptions
allow for simpler formulas. We assume:
•𝑝𝑑/𝑛≪1
•𝜆=𝑝𝑑 2/𝑛≫1
•𝑑≫ln 2𝑛
•ℎ≪𝜆
Claim F.3.Assume that (𝑝+ 1)𝑑<𝑛/ln 2𝑛. With proba-
bility > 1−𝑛−2, all nodes pick at most 𝑜(𝑑) neighbors outside
𝐼𝑅(𝑡).
Proof. Fix a node𝑣. We will treat each of the at most𝑑
neighbors that𝑣 has to pick as independent choices among
𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡)∪𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡)∪𝑅 1(𝑡) . The probability that a neighbor
lies in𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡)∪𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) is at most|𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡)∪𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡)|/𝑛≤
𝑑(𝑝+ 1)/𝑛≤ 1/ln2𝑛. Let𝑋𝑣 be the random variable denoting
the number of neighbors of 𝑣 in𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡)∪𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) , which
is a sum of iid Bernoullis. Note thatE [𝑋𝑣] ≤𝑑/ln2𝑛. By
Theorem D.3, Pr[𝑋𝑣 >𝑑/ln𝑛]≤ 2−𝑑/ln𝑛 . By a union bound
over all vertices, the probability that any𝑋𝑣 >𝑑/ln𝑛 is at
most𝑛2−𝑑/ln𝑛≤𝑛−2.
By Theorem E.4, with probability > 1−𝑛−4, the size of
𝑂𝑅(𝑡) is at most(exp(−𝜆)+𝑜( 1))𝑛. The probability that𝑣
has a single neighbor in this set is 𝑜( 1). Using a Chernoff
bound identical to the one above, the probability that𝑣 has
more than𝛿𝑛neighbors (for any constant𝛿>0) is𝑛 −Θ(1) .
Take a union bound, with high probability, all nodes pick
at most𝑜(𝑑)neighbors outside𝐼𝑅(𝑡).□
F.1 The matching connection
For any subset𝑆⊆𝐼𝑅(𝑡) , let us construct the bipartite graph
𝐷𝑆 =(𝑆,𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡),𝐸) as follows. We connect 𝑠∈𝑆 to𝑣∈
𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡)if𝑠is a descendant of𝑣in the pointing graphP 𝑡.
Claim F.4.For any 𝑆⊆𝐼𝑅(𝑡) : connect a source 𝑠 to all
nodes in𝑆 and consider the resulting pointing graph. The size
of the𝑠-𝑡mincut is the size of the largest matching in𝐷 𝑆 .
Proof. We first prove that the largest matching in 𝐷𝑆
is at least the mincut size (say 𝑟). By the maxflow-mincut
theorem, there is a flow of value𝑟 from𝑆 to𝑡, with unit edge
capacities. By the integrality of flow, this flow consists of
𝑟 edge disjoint paths from𝑠 to𝑡. Note that each node in 𝑆
has a single edge to𝑠, and every node in𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡) has a single
edge to𝑡. So a node in𝑆∪𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡) participates in at most one
flow path. Thus, the𝑟 flow paths provide edge disjoint paths
from𝑆 to𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡) in the pointing graphP𝑡, which constitute
a matching in𝐷 𝑆.
Now, we prove that the mincut is at least the size of the
largest matching in 𝐷𝑆. Consider a matching given by 𝜙 :
𝑆→𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡) . For each𝑠′∈𝑆 , follow a parent to𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) , and
then a parent to get to𝜙(𝑠)∈𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡) . For two nodes𝑠′ ≠𝑠′′
in𝑆,𝜙(𝑠′)≠𝜙(𝑠 ′′). So the corresponding paths are edge
disjoint. Hence, we can send one unit of flow on each such
path, and get a flow with value at least the matching size.
The maxflow value (and hence the mincut value) is at least
the matching size.□
22


===== PAGE 23 =====
We can now connect the 𝑠-𝑡 mincut of the Spraypoint
graphS𝑠,𝑡 to matching sizes. Note that S𝑠,𝑡 is formed by
adding the edges connecting 𝑠 to its neighborhood to P𝑡.
For convenience, we will only add the edges connecting𝑠 to
𝐼𝑅(𝑡) . By Claim F.3, this reduces the mincut by at most𝑜(𝑑) .
To bound the matching sizes, we use the following nota-
tion, based on random matching sizes.
Definition F.5.For positive integers ℓ,𝑟,ℎ , consider the ran-
dom bipartite graph𝐻(𝐿,𝑅,𝐸) formed as follows. We have
|𝐿|=ℓ ,|𝑅|=𝑟 , and each node in𝐿 picksℎ uar neighbors in
𝑅 with replacement. We use𝜇(ℓ,𝑟 ;ℎ) to denote the expected
maximum matching in𝐻.
We now state our main theorem relating𝑠-𝑡 mincuts in
S𝑠,𝑡 to matching sizes.
Theorem F.6.Assume ℎ=𝑜(𝑑) . The expected 𝑠-𝑡 mincut
size ofS𝑠,𝑡 has the following values:
•If𝑠∈𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡): the size is at least𝜇(𝑑−𝑝,𝑑;ℎ)±𝑜(𝑑).
•If𝑠∉𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡): the size is at least𝜇(𝑑,𝑑;ℎ)±𝑜(𝑑).
Proof. Consider𝑠∈𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡) . As discussed earlier, it picks
𝑑−𝑝− 1random neighbors after conditioning on the pointing
structure. By Claim F.3, at most𝑜(𝑑) of these neighbors lie
outside𝐼𝑅(𝑡) . So, it picks 𝑑−𝑝− 1−𝑜(𝑑)=𝑑−𝑝−𝑜(𝑑)
neighbors in𝐼𝑅(𝑡) . Call this set𝑆. By Claim F.4, the𝑠-𝑡 mincut
size is the size of the largest matching in𝐷𝑆. Each node𝑠′
in𝑆 (which is in𝐼𝑅(𝑡) ) picksℎ random parents in𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) ,
each of which has a parent in 𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡) . (We ignore the fact
that nodes in𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) might have multiple parents.) Thus,
each𝑠′ effectively picksℎ random ancestors in𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡) . So
𝐷𝑆 is distributed exactly as the random bipartite graph in
Definition F.5, and the expected matching size is𝜇(𝑑−𝑝−
𝑜(𝑑),𝑑 ;ℎ). We can express this quantity as𝜇(𝑑−𝑝,𝑑 ;ℎ)±𝑜(𝑑) ,
since changing any of the sets (in a bipartite graph) by𝑜(𝑑)
can affect the matching size by at most𝑜(𝑑).
Consider𝑠∈𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) . It picks𝑑−𝑜(𝑑) random neighbors
in𝐼𝑅(𝑡) . Applying the same logic as above, the expected
mincut has value 𝜇(𝑑,𝑑 ;ℎ)±𝑜( 1). For 𝑠∈𝐼𝑅(𝑡) , it picks
𝑑−ℎ−𝑜(𝑑) random neighbors in 𝐼𝑅(𝑡) . Sinceℎ=𝑜(𝑑) ,𝑠
basically picks𝑑−𝑜(𝑑) random neighbors, and the value is
the same as for𝑠∈𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡).□
This theorem gives a lower bound on the size of the mincut.
As mentioned in the proof, we ignore the fact that𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡)
has potentiallyℎ neighbors into𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡) , and only use one
of the neighbors for routing. We believe this only loses a
lower order term, and so we ignore it for the sake of cleaner
expressions.
F.2 Expressions for random matching sizes
A good rule of thumb is that𝜇(𝑑,𝑑 ;ℎ)≈𝑑( 1−exp(−ℎ)) . If
𝑑−𝑝=𝛼𝑑, then:
𝜇(𝑑−𝑝,𝑑;ℎ)=𝜇(𝛼𝑑,𝑑;ℎ)=min
h
𝛼𝑑,𝑑[1−exp(−𝛼ℎ)]
i
(3)
For ℎ= 1, these bounds are tight. For larger ℎ, there
are only upper bounds. Nevertheless, they match up quite
accurately with experiments. The exact lower bound is a
more complex expression given by Frieze-Mellsted [13], as
explained later.
We show theupperbound in the next lemma, and then give
the complicated exact expression. (The proof for𝜇(𝛼𝑑,𝑑 ;ℎ)
is analogous and omitted.)
Lemma F.7.For all ℎ,𝜇(𝑑,𝑑 ;ℎ)≤𝑑( 1−exp(−ℎ))−𝑜(𝑑) .
Also,𝜇(𝑑,𝑑; 1)=𝑑(1−1/𝑒)−𝑜(𝑑).
Proof. Recall that 𝜇(𝑑,𝑑 ;ℎ) is the expected maximum
matching in the following random bipartite graph. There
are two sets𝐿,𝑅 of size𝑑. Each node in𝐿 makesℎ random
connections with𝑅.
Consider a vertex𝑟∈𝑅 . The probability that an edge does
not connect with𝑟 is(1− 1/𝑑). The probability that no edge
makes a connection is(1− 1/𝑑)𝑑ℎ, since there are𝑑ℎ random
(multi)edges in the graph. Since1 −𝑥≥exp(−𝑥−𝑥 2), we
lower bound this probability by exp(−( 1/𝑑+ 1/𝑑2)·𝑑ℎ)=
exp(−ℎ)(1−Θ(ℎ/𝑑)).
Consider indicator random variable𝑋𝑟 for𝑟 having degree
zero. By linearity of expectation and the calculation above,
E[Í
𝑟∈𝑅 𝑋𝑟]= Í
𝑟∈𝑅 E[𝑋𝑟]≥𝑑exp(−ℎ)−𝑜(𝑑) . We can also
upper bound(1−1/𝑑)≤𝑒𝑥𝑝(− 1/𝑑), and get the lower bound
𝑑exp(−ℎ) . Thus, the expected number of degree zero nodes
in𝑅 is𝑑exp(−ℎ)±𝑜(𝑑) . These nodes cannot be matched,
and hence the matching size is at most𝑑( 1−exp(−ℎ))±𝑜(𝑑) .
Whenℎ= 1, we can match this bound. Take the iterative
process that picks an arbitrary node in𝑅 with non-zero de-
gree, and matches it arbitrarily to some neighbor in𝐿. Then,
we delete this node and its neighbors from the graph, and
iterate. When𝑟∈𝑅 is removed, it removes its neighbors in𝐿.
Since they all have degree1, all edges removed are incident
to𝑟. Hence, degrees of other nodes in𝑅 are unaffected. All
in all, every node of non-zero degree in𝑅 gets matched. □
The Frieze-Mellsted bound:The optimal value oflim𝑑→∞
𝜇(𝑑,𝑑 ;ℎ)/𝑑 was computed in [13]. We state the bound here,
and show that it is fairly close to the simpler expression of
Lemma F.7.
(Refer to Thm. 3 of [13].) Let𝑧∗ be the largest non-negative
solution of(𝑧/ℎ) 1/(ℎ−1) +exp(−𝑧)+1=0. Then,
lim
𝑑→∞
𝜇(𝑑,𝑑;ℎ)/𝑑=2−(1−exp(−𝑧 ∗))ℎ
−(1+𝑧 ∗)exp(−𝑧∗)(4)
≈1−(1+𝑧 ∗−ℎ)exp(−𝑧 ∗)(5)
23


===== PAGE 24 =====
Forℎ= 2, the bound is≈ 0.838, while the bound of Lemma F.7
is≈ 0.865. Forℎ= 4, the bound is≈ 0.979, while the bound
of Lemma F.7 is≈ 0.982. Asℎ becomes larger,𝑧∗ tends toℎ,
and the bound above tends to1−exp(−ℎ).
F.3 The mincut bound, summarized
We summarize the bounds in this section. Fix a destination𝑡.
The𝑠-𝑡 mincut value of the Spraypoint graphS𝑠,𝑡 is given
by the following formulas:
•For most𝑠, the average mincut is𝑑(1−exp(−ℎ)).
• The lowest (expected) mincut occurs for𝑠∈𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡) . In
that case, setting𝑑−𝑝=𝛼𝑑 , the bound ismin
h
𝛼𝑑,𝑑[ 1−
exp(−𝛼ℎ)]
i
. When𝛼 is close to1, the bound is close
to𝑑(1−exp(−ℎ)).
To get a sense of the benefits ofℎ, we plug in different values.
The best possible mincut is𝑑. Let us see what fraction of𝑑
is achieved. Forℎ= 1, we get a1− 1/𝑒≈ 0.63fraction. For
ℎ= 2, we get a1−exp(− 2)≈ 0.86fraction. For ℎ= 4, we get
a1−exp(− 4)≈ 0.98fraction. At this point, the statistical
variation of the mincut value is bigger than any potential
improvements.
The following table gives the various fractions. Note that
𝑝=0gives the bound for most𝑠.
𝑝 ℎ=1 ℎ=2 ℎ=4
0 0.63 0.86 0.98
𝑑/4 0.53 0.75 0.75
𝑑/3 0.49 0.66 0.66
𝑑/2 0.39 0.5 0.5
G MODELING OVERSUBSCRIPTION
To help us characterize stochastic oversubscription, we set up
some notation and definitions. We set up a multicommodity
flow problem. Each edge of the graph𝐺=(𝑉,𝐸) is treated
as two directed arcs, one in each direction. The capacity of
each arc is one. There is a doubly stochastic demand matrix
𝑀 that specifies that amount of flow that each source needs
to send to each destination. So 𝑀𝑠,𝑡 is the amount of flow
that𝑠 needs to send to𝑡. The total flow in or out of any node
is at most one since𝑀is doubly stochastic.
Definition G.1.(1) A demand matrix 𝑁 is afeasible ma-
trixif the multicommodity flow specified by𝑁 can be routed
while honoring link capacity constraints. (2) Thedemand
multiplierof a doubly stochastic demand matrix 𝑀, de-
noted𝑐(𝑀) , is the largest 𝑐 such that𝑐𝑀 can be satisfied.
(3) Theoversubscription ratio (oversub)is the value of
max𝑀𝑑/𝑐(𝑀).
Thus, the oversub is the scaled reciprocal of the lowest
possible demand multiplier.
Our first lemma connects the oversub to the fraction of
optimal flow along different lengths.
Lemma G.2.Consider the traffic matrix 𝑀 that achieves the
oversub bound. For the corresponding optimal flow, let𝛿𝑖 be the
fraction of the flow that takes length 𝑖 paths. Then, the oversub
is at least Í
𝑖𝑖𝛿𝑖 .
Proof. The proof goes via a simple “total capacity" argu-
ment. Suppose the oversub is𝜔. This means that the corre-
sponding demand multiplier is𝑑/𝜔 , which is the total flow
that each node sends/receives. The total flow in the network
is𝑛𝑑/𝜔, since each node is a source.
Let us bound the sum𝐹 := Í
arc𝑒 𝑓𝑒, where𝑓𝑒 is the total
flow on the arc𝑒. By definition, the amount of flow along
length𝑖 paths is 𝛿𝑖𝑛𝑑/𝜔. Observe that this flow takes up
𝑖𝛿𝑖𝑛𝑑/𝜔 capacity. Thus, the contribution of this flow to the
sum𝐹is𝑖𝛿 𝑖𝑛𝑑/𝜔, and we bound𝐹= Í
𝑖𝑖𝛿𝑖𝑛𝑑/𝜔.
Since each arc has unit capacity and there are 𝑛𝑑 arcs,
𝐹≤𝑛𝑑. So Í
𝑖𝛿𝑖𝑛𝑑/𝜔≤𝑛𝑑and𝜔≥𝑖 Í
𝑖𝛿𝑖.□
G.1 Principles underlying the model
Based on Lemma G.2, we will devise a model for oversub in
the next section as a function of system parameters,𝑛,𝑑,𝑝,ℎ .
The model is based on a number of principles.
The greedy shorter path principle:The oversub lower
bound of Lemma G.2 is Í
𝑖𝑖𝛿𝑖, so it is preferable to have
larger values of 𝛿𝑖 for small 𝑖, rather than the other way
around. Based on this intuition, we construct the demand
multipliers for a demand matrix by greedily maximizing the
amount of flow on shorter paths first. For theℓ= 1setting,
all flows paths have length between1to5(Theorem E.4). We
can ignore path length1, which form a neglible fraction of
paths. The main calculations compute the maximum amount
of flow that goes along paths of length2, then conditioned
on that, maximize flow along paths of length3, so on and so
forth. We compute𝜇2,𝜇 3,𝜇 4, and𝜇5 defined as follows. The
average amount of flow that a source sends along length𝑖
paths is𝜇𝑖𝑑. The total demand multiplier is(𝜇 2+𝜇 3+𝜇 4+𝜇 5)𝑑,
and hence the oversub is(𝜇 2+𝜇 3+𝜇 4+𝜇 5)−1.
The average case principle:By Theorem 2.1 of [ 37], the
worst-case traffic matrix is a permutation matrix, which is a
perfect matching of source to sinks. We will actually analyze
the average demand multiplier, and hence oversub, of aran-
dompermutation matrix. In many problems in random graph
theory, the worst-case behavior can be shown to be close to
the average-case behavior. Specifically, suppose an adversary
picks a traffic matrix and then we choose the graph𝐺. We
can compute the probability that the demand multiplier de-
viates significantly from the average value. If this probability
is small enough (like <𝑛 −𝑛), we could union bound over
all permutation matrices. This means, that with non-trivial
24


===== PAGE 25 =====
probability, a random graph will have high demand multipli-
ers forallpermutation matrices. This is a common paradigm
in random graph/matrix theory: show that the probability of
large deviations from average are exponentially small, and
then union bound over all the exponential possibilities (proof
of expansion of random graphs, Chap. 5 of [34]).
The random deletion principle:Once (say) we have de-
termined𝜇2, this flow uses up some capacity. When comput-
ing𝜇3, the capacity constraints have changed. We consider
a simplified model for the change. The length2flow uses up
2𝜇2𝑛𝑑 capacity from the network, so we assume that each
edge is fully congested with probability2𝜇2𝑛𝑑/𝑛𝑑= 2𝜇2. We
delete these edges, since they are unavailable to carry flow.
This deletion principle is less accurate for larger length flows.
Larger length flows do not use up the capacity of constituent
edges. Hence, for most calculations, we will only assume this
principle for smaller length flows.
The viable path principle:For any length 𝑖, we esti-
mate the number of paths of length 𝑖 that can be used for
routing. For concreteness, for the remaining principles, we
will consider length3(the first non-trivial case). Such a path
goes𝑠→𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡)→𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡)→𝑡 . Theorem E.4 tells us how
many neighbors of 𝑠 lead to such paths (in this case, it is
𝑝𝑑 2/𝑛 for an average source𝑠). Because of the deletion prin-
ciple, some of these edges (from 𝑠 to𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) ) get deleted.
Consider some 𝑣∈𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) such that(𝑠,𝑣) is not deleted.
The pointing paths from𝑣 to𝑡 may get removedafterthe
deletions. We need to model the probability of this event.
The parameterℎ ensures that each 𝑣 hasℎ (edge disjoint)
pointing paths to𝑡. We calculate the probability that some
path survives the deletion. Putting it all together, we can es-
timate the number of paths of length3that allow for routing.
The next principles account for the intersections/congestion
among these paths, from which we compute the flow that
can be sent along these paths.
The unique position principle:By the mincut bounds
of Lemma F.7, there should be enough edge disjoint paths
length between a given source-destination pair to carry the
desired flow. (We do not expect an oversub less than2, so
even an mincut of𝑑/2suffices for a source-destination pair.)
Consider the entire collection of edge disjoint length3paths,
over all source-destination pairs. Congestion occurs because
some edges are present among length3paths for multiple
source-destination pair.
The concept ofpositionhelps us bound the congestion.
For a path, an edge has one of three positions: first, middle,
or last.An edge (𝑢,𝑣) cannot be in the first position for more
than one path.When (𝑢,𝑣) is the first edge,𝑢 must be the
source, and all length3paths from 𝑢 (in the collection) are
edge disjoint. Similarly, an edge cannot be in the last position
for more than one path. Extrapolating, we assume that no
edge can be in a specific position for more than one path.
(This is technically false, since an edge could be in the middle
for multiple paths, but we believe this only leads to a lower
order term.) Overall, for length3, an edge can participate in
at most3flow paths of length3. Similarly, we assume that
for length𝑖, an edge participates in at most𝑖 flow paths, one
in each position.
The binomial congestion principle:We want to com-
pute the amount of flow along length3paths to estimate 𝜇3.
Using the viable path principle, suppose we determine that
there are𝜙 3𝑑edge disjoint paths of length3between every
source-destination pair. Consider the total collection of𝜙3𝑛𝑑
paths. We want to model, for a given edge, the number of
paths that this edge participates in. This is the congestion on
that edge, focusing only on length3flow. By the unique po-
sition principle, the congestion is at most3. We will assume
that an edge is present in a particular position independently
with probability𝜙3. Consider an edge on a particular length3
path. It already occupies a position on this path, and can take
up two other positions (on different paths). The congestion
on the edge is distributed as the binomial𝐵( 2,𝜙 3)+ 1(the
binomial𝐵( 2,𝜙 3) is the sum of2independent0-1random
variables with expectation𝜙 3) plus one.
The reciprocal principle:On each edge of the path,
using the binomial model, we have a distribution for the
number ofotherpaths that use this edge. The maximum
value among all the edges of the path is the congestion of the
path. We use the following simple claim to get a flow bound.
Claim G.3.Consider a family P of paths. For each path
in𝑃∈P , let 𝑐(𝑃) be the congestion of 𝑃 among the paths
P. (So 𝑐(𝑃) is the maximum, among all edges of 𝑃, of the
number of paths that use the edge.) Then each path 𝑃∈P can
simultaneously route1/𝑐(𝑃) units of flow without violating
the (unit) capacity constraints.
Proof. Suppose every path𝑃∈P routes1/𝑐(𝑃) units of
flow. Consider any edge𝑒 that is contained in path𝑃1,𝑃 2,...,𝑃 𝑘.
The congestion of𝑒, denoted𝑐(𝑒) , is𝑘. Observe that for ev-
ery path𝑃𝑖,𝑐(𝑃𝑖)≥𝑐(𝑒)=𝑘 . The total amount of flow in𝑒
is Í
𝑖≤𝑘 1/𝑐(𝑃𝑖)≤ Í
𝑖≤𝑘 1/𝑐(𝑒)= Í
𝑖≤𝑘 1/𝑘=1.□
This claim allows us to get the total flow that can be sent
along, say, length3paths. Over these paths, we have com-
puted the distribution of congestion. The average value of
the reciprocal of the congestion is the average flow that can
be sent along paths of this length. We multiply this average
by the total number of paths to get the total flow.
To move to the next path length, we use the random dele-
tion principle to delete edges that are used by this flow. We
run this entire calculation again for the next path length.
For larger paths lengths𝑖 (like4and above), the congestion
values of the paths are quite close to their maximum value𝑖.
So we just send1/𝑖 units of flow along paths of these length.
25


===== PAGE 26 =====
This simplification helps us avoid complicated probability
calculations that are lower order terms.
G.2 The oversub formula
We now compute the formula based on the principles above.
Given the parameters,𝑛,𝑑,𝑝, andℎ, the final formula is a
polynomial function of𝑝 and𝑑/𝑛, with exponential depen-
dencies onℎ. There are minor corrections needed for extreme
parameter settings (when𝑑 is comparable to𝑛, or𝑝 is close
to𝑑). As discussed earlier, we will estimate𝜇2,𝜇 3,𝜇 4, and𝜇5.
𝜇2: By Theorem E.4, for a given destination 𝑡, a typical
source𝑠 would have a𝑑/𝑛 fraction of its neighbors in𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡) .
The total number of such paths from𝑠 to𝑡 is𝑑 2/𝑛 and the
total number of edges on these paths is2𝑑 2/𝑛. As a fraction
of the total number of arcs (directed edges), we get2𝑑/𝑛 (=
(2𝑑 2/𝑛)·𝑛/𝑛𝑑 ). We typically assume that2𝑑≪𝑛 . Assuming
that an edge is present on these paths with probability2𝑑/𝑛,
the probability that an edge is on two (or more) paths is
(2𝑑/𝑛) 2, which is negligible. So we assume that no edge is
present on two of these paths, or equivalently, the congestion
of every path/edge is at most one. So all the length2paths
across all source-destination pairs are edge disjoint. Each
such path can carry one unit of flow, so𝑠 can send𝑑 2/𝑛 units
of flow along length2paths to𝑡. Thus,𝜇 2 =𝑑/𝑛
𝜇3: This is where most of the work goes. By the unique
position principle and the random deletion principle, each
edge has probability 𝜇2 of being in the first position of a
length2flow path. (Same for the last position.) So we will
delete a𝜇2 fraction of edges (for the first position), and delete
another𝜇 2 fraction for the last position.
We now estimate the number of length3paths that can be
used to route flow. We compute a fraction𝜙3 such that each
source-destination pair has𝜙3𝑑 viable length3paths to route
flow. By Theorem E.4, a typical source𝑠 has a𝑝𝑑/𝑛=𝑝𝜇 2
fraction of neighbors in𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) . (For extreme large values
of𝑝,𝑝𝜇 2 could be larger than one, so we “correct" by making
this fraction min(𝑝𝜇 2, 1−𝜇 2). The latter term just assumes
that everything that is not in𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡) is in𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) .) Of these
corresponding edges incident to𝑠, some of them might be
in the last position of a length2flow. They cannot be in
the first position, since all first position edges go from𝑠 to
𝑁𝑏𝑟(𝑡) , while these edges under consideration go from𝑠 to
𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) . By the deletion principle, we expect a𝜇2-fraction of
the edges to be deleted.
So we get that a min(𝑝𝜇 2, 1−𝜇 2)·( 1−𝜇 2) fraction of
neighbors of a source𝑠 lead to length3paths to the corre-
sponding destination𝑡. Consider such a neighbor𝑣 of𝑠 that
is in𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) . It hasℎ pointing (likely edge disjoint) paths
of length2to the destination 𝑡. Each edge gets deleted with
independent probability2𝜇2, so a path survives with prob-
ability(1− 2𝜇2)2≈ 1− 4𝜇2 (assuming𝜇2 << 1). The path
gets removed with probability≈ 4𝜇2. The probability that
at least one ofℎ edge disjoint paths survives is1 −( 4𝜇2)ℎ.
Overall, the probability that𝑣∈𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) still has a path to𝑡
is1−(4𝜇 2)ℎ.
Combining with the number of such𝑣’s, we get that there
are𝜙3𝑑 neighbors of 𝑠 that lead to viable3length flows,
where:
𝜙3 =min(𝑝𝜇 2,1−𝜇 2)·(1−𝜇 2)·(1−(4𝜇 2)ℎ)(6)
Our next step is to deal with the congestion. Consider a
length3flow path. Each edge on this path could potentially
take up two other positions (on different paths), using the
unique position principle. The congestion on the path is the
maximum of three independently chosen random variables
according to the shifted binomial𝐵(2,𝜙 3)+1.
Claim G.4.Define 𝑌 :=max(𝑋 1,𝑋 2,𝑋 3), where each 𝑋𝑖
is independently chosen from 𝐵( 2,𝜙 3). Then, Pr[𝑌= 0]=
(1−𝜙 3)6, Pr[𝑌= 1]=[( 1−𝜙 2
3)3−( 1−𝜙 3)6], and Pr[𝑌=
2]=[1−(1−𝜙 2
3)3].
Proof. We can treat each binomial as the sum of two
independent Bernoullis, each with parameter𝜙3. For𝑌 to be
zero, all the Bernoullis need to take value zero. This happens
with probability(1−𝜙 3)6.
Each𝑋𝑖 takes value2with probability 𝜙 2
3. The probability
that no 𝑋𝑖 takes value2is (1−𝜙 2
3)3. Thus, Pr[𝑌= 2]=
[1−(1−𝜙 2
3)3].
We deduce Pr[𝑌= 1] as1−Pr[𝑌= 0]−Pr[𝑌= 2], and
applying the above formulas.□
The congestion on a path is distributed as 𝑌+ 1, where
𝑌 is distributed as in Claim G.4. As discussed in the earlier
section, the average flow that can be sent isE [1/(𝑌+ 1)].
Using Claim G.4, this average can be computed easily:
𝜅3 =(1−𝜙 3)6+[(1−𝜙 2
3)3−(1−𝜙 3)6]/2
+[1−(1−𝜙 2
3)3]/3(7)
Finally, we set𝜇 3 =𝜙 3𝜅3.
𝜇4 and𝜇 5: We create variables for the relative sizes of the
Spraypoint levels, based on Theorem E.4.
𝜎4 =1−(𝑝+1)𝑑/𝑛−exp(−𝑝𝑑 2/𝑛)𝜎 5 =exp(−𝑝𝑑 2/𝑛)(8)
Let us start with 𝜇4. The quantity 𝜎4 is the fraction of 𝑠’s
neighbors that lead to a length4flow path. The probability
that these corresponding edges are removed by previous
flows is𝜇2+ 2𝜇3. (This edge can take up the last position in
length2flows, and the middle or last position in length3
flows.)
Consider a neighbor 𝑣 of𝑠 leading to length4path. As
in the previous 𝜇3 calculations, we need to compute the
probability that𝑣 still has a path to𝑡 after the deletions. We
will model𝑣’s pointing paths as follows. It hasℎ neighbors in
𝑊𝑃 1(𝑡) , each of which hasℎ edge disjoint paths to𝑡. Since
26


===== PAGE 27 =====
we are considering longer paths, we will go with the weaker
deletion principle of removing edges with probability2 𝜇2.
The probability that𝑣 still has a path to𝑡 can be approximated
as𝛽, defined below.
𝛽=1−[1−(1−2𝜇 2)(1−(4𝜇 2)ℎ)]ℎ (9)
The fraction of viable paths is𝜙4 =𝜎 4𝛽. For paths of length
4, we will simply assume the worst case congestion of4, so
we can only send1/4units of flow on each path. So we set
𝜅4 =1/4and𝜇 4 =𝜎 4𝜅4 =𝜎 4𝛽(1−𝜇 2−2𝜇 3)/4.
For𝜇5, we only look at deletions incident to the source
𝑠. This is because there will be many paths (polynomial in
ℎ) from a neighbor of𝑠 (in𝑂𝑅(𝑡) ) to the destination𝑡. The
odds are quite high that some path will still be available for
routing, so we do not bother to model it carefully. Following
the logic for𝜇 4, we estimate𝜇 5 =𝜎 4(1−𝜇 2−2𝜇 3−3𝜇 4)/5.
Let𝜇+
𝑖 =max(𝜇 𝑖, 0). This deals with extreme situations (𝑛
is too small,𝑝or𝑑are large). Finally, our oversub bound is
(𝜇+
2+𝜇+
3+𝜇+
4+𝜇+
5)−1 (10)
27